+++
title = "004 इन्द्रानिल-यमार्काणाम् अग्नेश्"

+++
**(verses 7.3-13)  
**

*Mahābhārata* (Parāśaramādhava-Ācāra, p.393)—‘All the deities are
invisible; the king is the only visible deity, whose favour and
disfavour bring about visible results. The king is the father, the
mother and also the family of all those of noble families; the king is
Truth and Deity; and the king is the great benefactor of the people. Let
there be no doubt as to whether the king is the regulator of the time or
time is the regulator of the king; for it is the king who regulates
time. O King! in this world, the virtue of men is guarded by the king;
it is only through fear of the king that people do not devour each
other,’

*Bṛhat-Parāśara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 16).—‘Brahmā created the
king with portions of Indra, Fire, Wind, Yama, Sun, Moon, Varuṇa, Kuvera
and Īśāna.’

*Bṛhat-Parāśara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 20).—‘With or without
cause, having his anger aroused, the king could burn the people; that is
why people knowing the policy of kings call the king *Fire*.’

*Nārada* (Do.).—‘When the king becomes angry, with or without cause, he
burns the people; that is why they call him *Fire*. When the king
desirous of conquest has recourse to valour and marches against enemies,
then is he called *Indra*. The king is called the *Moon* when, on the
disappearance of anger and splendour, he appears before the people in a
happy mood. When the king seated on the seat of judgment, awards
punishments impartially to all creatures, then he is *Yama*. When the
king bestows gifts upon learned men and dependents seeking for help,
then he is called *Kuvera*. As among human beings, the king is without
beginning and without end, and as he is endowed with splendour and
purity, and as he deviates not from the right path, and as an impure man
becomes pure by his word, and the pure becomes impure, wherefore should
not such a king not be a god?’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘Inasmuch as the king *keeps the people pleased*
(*rañjayati*) by means of his four-limbed army, and shines with his
splendid body, he is called the *Raja*.’

*Aṅgiras* (Do.).—‘Inasmuch as the king, by means of punishments, removes
evil he is called the *Guru*.’

*Mahābhārata* (Do.).—‘In countries devoid of a king, Righteousness
obtains no footing and people devour one another; fie, therefore, upon
anarchy! Since the Veda declares the king to be Indra, he should be
honoured by one who desires his own welfare, in the same manner as
Indra. I feel that one should never live in a country where there is no
king. In a country where there is no king, the Fire does not convey
offerings to the gods. Such countries as have no kings are powerless
whenever attacked by enemies.’

*Vālmiki-Rāmāyaṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 20).—‘In a country where
there is no king, there is no safety of life or property; nor is the
enemy able to bear any attack by enemies.’

*Garuḍa-purāṇa* (Do.).—‘Wealthy man, Vedic scholar, king, river, and
physician,—in a place where these five are nor present, one should not
take up residence.’

*Śukranīti* (l.141).—‘The king is made out of the paramount elements of
Indra, Vāyu, Yama, Surya (Sūrya), Agni, Varuṇa, Chandra, and Kuvera; he
is the lord of both the moveable and immoveable worlds.’
