+++
title = "032 स्वराष्ट्रे न्यायवृत्तः"

+++
*Kāmandaka* (4.15-19).—‘Eloquence, self-confidence, accuracy of memory,
stateliness of stature, superior might, self-control, ingenuity in
inventing means and instruments of torture, perfection in all arts,
ability to reclaim men from evil ways, power of sustaining assaults from
enemies, knowledge of remedies against danger, promptness in detecting
the weak points of the enemy, familiarity with the nature of war and
peace, strict observance of secrecy regarding all counsel and action,
proficiency in utilising place and time, collection of money and its
proper expenditure, deep insight into the nature of dependants, freedom
from anger, avarice, fear, malice, obstinacy and fickleness—avoidance of
tyranny, depravity, animosity, jealousy and falsehood,—compliance with
the advice of elders,—learning, energy, amiable appearance, appreciation
of people’s worth and smiling words;—these are the indispensable
qualifications of a sovereign.’

Do. (6.8).—‘Thus knowing what is just and what unjust, and abiding by
the decrees of the pious, the king should cherish his subjects and
should oxtirpate his adversaries.’

Do. (14.13).—‘A king hard in inflicting punishment excites the people;
thus harassed, they seek the protection of the enemy.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.96).—‘In his own domain, the king shall inflict punishments
according to justice, chastise foreign foes with rigour, behave without
duplicity to his affectionate friends and with lenience towards
Brāhmaṇas.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 31).—‘Sticking to one’s own duty leads to Heaven and
Immortality; neglecting thereof leads to confusion and ruin. Therefore
the king shall never disturb the specific duties of living beings. By
remaining firm in his own duty, he is happy here as also after death;
the people are contented, never discontented, if the rules of gentility
are duly observed, and if they are protected according to the three
Vedas.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.333).—‘To his dependants and to his people, the king
shall be as father; lenient towards Brāhmaṇas, straightforward to his
affectionate friends, rigorous towards enemies.’

*Śukranīti* (1.52-54).—‘From the very moment that a man attains the
position of a king through skill, might or valour,—no matter whether he
is anointed or not,—he should begin to rule his subjects according to
law, being above hoard and ever holding his sceptre.’

Do. (1.59.62).—‘The king who protects his people and is
charitable......is called *Sāttvika* and attains salvation.’
