+++
title = "043 त्रैविद्येभ्यस् त्रयीम्"

+++
*Gautama* (11.3).—‘The king shall be fully instructed in the threefold
science and in Logic.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.310).—‘Fully instructed in Logic, in Political Science,
in Agricultural Science and in the Threefold Science (Vedas).’

*Arthaśāstra* (pp. 34-35).—‘The discipline of the sciences is obtained
through the authority of the professors of each; for the sake of this
discipline one should always remain in constant touch with those learned
in the sciences.’

*Kāmandaka* (1.59, 63, 66).—‘Association with the Preceptor bestows
knowledge of the scriptures; knowledge of the scriptures increases
humility. A king who is modest under culture never sinks under
calamities. A king well-versed in polity, practising self-control, very
soon attains to that shining pitch of prosperity that has been attained
by other divine kings. The Preceptor is worshipped for the acquisition
of learning; learning which has been mastered becomes instrumental in
enhancing the prudence of the illustrious; and the habit of acting by
prudence leads to prosperity.’

*Kāmandaka* (2.1 *et. seq*.)—‘The king after having controlled his
senses, should direct his attention to the cultivation of the following
branches of learning—*Ānvīkṣikī* (Logic), *Trayī* (Vedic Triad) *Vārtā*
(Trade-Agriculture) and *Daṇḍanīti* (Science of Government). The
followers of Manu hold that there are only three divisions of
learning—Vedic Triad, Trade-Agriculture, and Science of Government;
according to them Logie is only a branch of the Vedic Triad. The
followers of Bṛhaspati postulate only two divisions:—Agriculture and
Science of Government; as only these help men in acquiring wealth.
According to Uśanas the Science of Government is the only division; the
origin of all other forms of learning lies in this. But according to our
own teacher, there are four branches :—*Ānvīkṣikī* deals with the
knowledge of the self, *Trayī* with Dharma and Adharma (right and
wrong), *Vārtā* with the acquiring and spending of wealth, and
*Daṇḍanīti* with justice and injustice. *Ānvīkṣikī*, *Trayī* and *Vārtā*
are excellent forms of knowledge; but they are of no avail if
*Daṇḍanīti* is neglected.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 26).—‘Ānvīkṣikī (Philosophy), Trayī (Three Vedas),
Vārtā (Trade-Agriculture) and Daṇḍanīti (Science of Government) are the
Sciences;—according to the Mānavas, the Three Vedas, Trade-Agriculture
and Science of Government—Philosophy being only a part of the Three
Vedas; according to the Bārhaspatyas, Trade-Agriculture and Science of
Government—the Three Vedas being only a cover for the man who knows the
worldly affairs; the Science of Government is the only Science, say the
followers of Uśanas—the progress of all Sciences being centred therein;
there are four Sciences, says Kauṭilya; it is by means of these that one
can understand the methods of acquiring wealth and spiritual merit; it
is this that constitutes the essence of the Sciences. Sāṅkhya, Yoga and
Lokāyata constitute ‘Philosophy’; Merit and Demerit are dealt with in
the Three Vedas; Profit and Loss are dealt with in the Science of
Trade-Agriculture; Policy, good and bad, is dealt with in the Science of
Government.’

*Śukranīti* (1.303).—‘Logic, Three Vedas, Trade-Agriculture, and Science
of Government,—these four branches of learning the king shall always
study.’

*Kāmandaka* (1.21-22).—‘Knowledge of Polity, wise judgment, contentment,
skilfulness,...... good conduct and restraint of the passions...... are
the sources of all prosperity.’
