+++
title = "054 मौलाञ् शास्त्रविदः"

+++
**(verses 7.54-55)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (3.71).—‘He shall appoint ministers to help him in his affairs,
who are pure, free from covetousness, attentive and able.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.310-311),—‘He shall appoint ministers who are
intelligent, hereditarily connected, firm and pure; with these he shall
take counsel; as also with the Brāhmaṇa.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 175).—‘He shall appoint such
assistants for himself as are brave, of noble family, strong, endowed
with wealth, beauty, nobility and other good qualities, self-controlled,
endowed with forgiveness, capable of hard work, courageous, knowing the
duty, of sweet speech,

capable of offering salutary advice and devoted to their master.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 175).—‘The attendants of
the king shall he gentle, high-born, brave, equipped with knowledge,
free from jealousy, not mean, pure and clever.’

*Mahābhārata* (Do.).—‘The king should appoint only such ministers as are
able and have been duly tested.’

Do. (*Rājadharma*) (Do., p. 177).—‘The king shall honour that minister
who is grateful, intelligent, free from meanness, firmly devoted to him,
firm in his duty and firmly grounded in political science.’

*Parāśara* (Do., p. 178).—‘The king shall appoint as ministers,
counsellors, ambassadors, priests, judge and members of the
assembly,—such people as may he devoted to his welfare and safety.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.).—The king shall appoint as his minister a Brāhmaṇa,
noble-born and devoted to the king, expert in his business.’

*Śukranīti* (2.106-109).—‘The king shall examine his officers with
reference to their work, companionship, merit, habits, family-relations
and other things; and place confidence in those that are found
trustworthy.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 174).—‘Immediately after his
anointment, the king shall proceed to select his assistants; even an
undertaking that is easy is difficult to he accomplished by a single
man, especially when one who has no assistant; how much more is the work
of the king which involves great issues! Therefore the king shall
himself select assistants born of noble families.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 41).—‘He shall appoint as ministers such persons as
have been his fellow-students; as he is cognisant of the purity of their
character, and hence has trust in them; so says Bharadvāja. This is
denied by Viśālākṣa, who holds that as these men have sported with him,
they are likely to disregard him; hence as ministers he should appoint
such men as share his secrets; because such men have the same habits and
defects as himself; as these men knowing that the king knows their
secrets will never misbehave towards him. Parāśara holds that this
objection is common to both; the king also knowing that they know his
secrets, will follow them in their acts of commission and omission;
hence he should appoint as ministers such persons as might have helped
him in dangerous situations; because their attachment to him has been
actually seen. Piśuna denies this; the feeling here mentioned is an
emotion, it is not a lasting quality of the mind; hence the king should
appoint as ministers such persons as have, in actual practice, been
found to have acted in strict accordance with orders; because the
quality of these will have been actually perceived. This again is denied
by Kauṇapadanta; because even these men would not be endowed with other
qualities necessary in ministers; therefore he shall appoint as
ministers such persons as have been hereditary ministers, because the
antecedents of such men are fully known; they will not abandon him even
though ill-treated, because of the hereditary relationship. This is
denied by Vātavyādhi, on the ground that such men would arrogate to
themselves all the powers of the master and would behave as such;
therefore be shall appoint as ministers such persons as are well-versed
in political science and are strangers; strangers would regard the king
as holding the rod of chastisement and would never misbehave. This is
denied by Bāhudantī-putra, on the ground that a man, though possessing
theoretical knowledge, if devoid of practical experience, would come to
grief; hence he should appoint as ministers such persons as are endowed
with the qualities of nobility of birth, wisdom, purity, bravery and
loyalty. All these opinions are right, says Kauṭilya; but the real
character of men can he ascertained only from actual experience; hence
the king shall examine the ministerial capacity of the persons
concerned, the exigencies of time and place, and also the nature of the
work in hand and then appoint them as *ministers*, not as the *chief
minister*.’

*Kāmandaka* (4.27-30).—‘*Upadhās* are the means of testing honesty, and
by these the king should test his dependants. A person who has got a
good many friends to deter him from the paths of vice, who is not a
foreigner by birth, who possesses noble lineage and character and great
physical strength, who is eloquent and audacious in speech and is
farsighted, energetic and ready-witted, who is free from obstinacy and
fickleness and is faithful to his friends, who is painstaking and pure
and truthful, who is blessed with equanimity, cheerfulness, patience,
gravity and health, who is a master of all the arts, dexterous, prudent
and retentive, unswerving in his devotion, and not prone to avenge the
wrongs done to him by his sovereign,—such a person should be selected as
the minister. Accuracy of memory, exclusive devotion to the ways and
means and the Empire, grave consideration of the *pros* and *cons* of a
question, unerring judgment, firmness, and observance of secrecy
regarding all counsels,—these are the necessary qualifications of a
minister.’

Do. (11.61).—‘A mantra or counsel consists of five parts: supports,
means to ends, divisions of time and place, averting of calamities and
final success.’

Do. (11.74).—‘Manu says twelve, Bṛhaspati says sixteen, and Uśanas says
twenty, ministers should form a cabinet.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 48).—‘Accompanied by the Chief Minister and the
Domestic Priest, he shall, in the first instance, appoint ministers to
unimportant posts, and there test them by means of tests.’

Do. (p. 76).—‘The cabinet of ministers shall consist of twelve—say the
followers of Manu; sixteen, say the followers of Bṛhaspati; twenty, say
the followers of Uśanas; the number shall depend on the king’s own
capacity, says Kauṭilya.’
