+++
title = "056 तैः सार्धम्"

+++
*Yājñavalkya* (1-311).—‘With the ministers the king shall take counsel;
specially with the Brāhmaṇa.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 45).—‘The following are the qualities of the Chief
Minister: He should have been born and bred in the kingdom, of noble
birth, having a large family, versed in the arts, with keen powers of
perception, intelligent, possessed of a retentive memory, clever,
eloquent, bold, quick-witted, endowed with courage and influence,
capable of hard work, pure, sympathetic, firmly loyal, equipped with
character, strength, health and patience, devoid of haughtiness and
fickleness, of prepossessing appearance and never likely to create
enmities. The king shall therefore examine the land of birth and family
of the candidates for Chief Ministership; the exact amount of their
knowledge of arts and sciences he shall find out from other persons
learned in the same; their intelligence, memory and cleverness he shall
find out from actual experience; eloquence he shall find out from his
conversations; as also lowness and quickness of wit; courage and
influence shall be found out in times of trouble; purity, sympathy and
loyalty from actual experience; character, strength, health and patience
from their neighbours; and prepossessing appearance from direct
perception.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 71).—‘All operations should be preceded by due
discussion among Ministers.’

*Kāmandaka* (13.23).—‘The functions of the *Prakritimaṇḍala* are the
following:—To hold counsels, to secure the results of counsels, to
direct others to perform their functions, to ascertain the effects of
coming events, to look after income and expenditure, to administer
justice, to subjugate enemies, to avert threatening evils and
calamities, to protect the kingdom,—those are the functions of the
minister. But the minister who is subject to the *vyasanas* fails in all
this.’
