+++
title = "069 जाङ्गलं सस्यसम्पन्नम्"

+++
**(verse 7.69)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (3.4-5).—‘The king shall fix his abode in a district containing
open plains, fit for cattle and abounding in grain;—and inhabited by
many Vaiśyas and Śūdras.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.320).—‘He shall reside in a country which is open,
pleasant, fit for cattle, and where living is easily found.’

*Smṛtyantarā* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 197).—‘That country is called
*Jāṅgala* where there are a few trees and a little *water*, many birds
and many animals, and abundant heat and rain.’

*Kāmandaka* (4.54-56).—‘A country where living is cheap, soil fertile
and copiously irrigated, which is situated at the foot of a hill,
contains a large number of *Śūdras*, traders and artisans, where the
farmers are enterprising and energetic,

which is loyal to its ruler and inhospitable to its enemies, which
ungrudgingly bears taxation, extensive in area, crowded with foreigners,
which is rich, pious and abounding in cattle, where the popular leaders
are not foolish and voluptuous,—such a country is the best. The king
should always endeavour to promote the welfare of such a land; for with
its prosperity, the other constituents of the state also prosper.’

*Kāmandaka* (4.61).—‘A country having communications both by land and by
water, and furnished with castles affording shelter to the royal family
at the time of seige—such a country is suitable for the habitation of a
king seeking prosperity.’

*Śukraniti* (1.425-428).—‘In a place that abounds in trees, plants and
shrubs,—that is rich in cattle, birds and other animals,—that is
equipped with a good supply of water and grains and is happily provided
with resources in grass and fuel,—that is bestirred by the movements of
boats to the seas, and is not very far from the hills, and is on level
ground, a picturesque plain,—the king shall build his capital.’

*Matsya-purāṇa* (Do., p. 198).—‘The king having appointed his
assistants, shall take up his residence in a country which is supplied
with abundant fodder and fuel, pleasant, where the vassals are obedient,
and which is centrally situated; where the population consists largely
of Vaiśyas and Śūdras, nor liable to attack by enemies, containing a few
Brāhmaṇas and many labourers; which is not dependent totally upon rain,
inhabited by men devoted to the king, not over-taxed, and supplied with
plenty of fruits and flowers; nor accessible to the armies of others,
where happiness and unhappiness are equable; which is free from
reptiles, wild animals and thieves;—as far as possible, the king shall
take up his residence in such a country.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Do.).—‘The king, along with his assistants, shall
take up his residence in a country which is suitable for cattle, open,
pleasant, inhabited principally by Vaiśyas and Śūdras, free from
diseases.’

*Arthaśāstra* (8.109).—‘Either an old settlement or a new one he shall
get inhabited either by importing men from other countries or by
overflowings from his own country; the village shall be inhabited mostly
by Śūdras and cultivators; consisting of not less than a hundred and not
more than five hundred families, with boundaries extending over two or
four miles and well marked by trees, hills, etc.’
