+++
title = "070 धन्व-दुर्गम् मही-दुर्गम्"

+++
*Mahābhārata* (12.86.5).—‘Dhanvadurga, Mahīdurga, Giridurga,
Manuṣyadurga, Mṛddurga, Vanadurga,—these are the six forts.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.6).—‘There shall he reside in a stronghold—either of desert,
or of armed men, or of fortifications, or of water, or of trees, or of
mountains.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.20).—‘There he shall build forts for the protection of
men and treasures.’

*Kāmandaka* (4.57).—‘The king should settle in a fortress which is
extensive, environed by a wide ditch and secured with gates,
strengthened with high massive walls and sheltered by mighty mountains,
forests and deserts.’

*Matsya-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 199).—‘The wise king shall
build one of the six kinds of fort—the Bow fort, the Earthen fort, the
Human fort, the Arborial fort, the Aquatic fort and the Hilly fort.’

*Auśanasa Dhanurveda* (Do.).—‘(1) The *Bow fort* is that which is devoid
of water, abounding in pebbles, rough, without supports, beset with
obstacles and poisonous insects, not admitting of easy locomotion,
equipped with strong guards and free from disease. (2) The *Earthen
fort* is equipped with all accessories, well protected, and supplied
with implements, in places very high, and in places very low. (3) The
*Human fort* consists of men related to the king hereditarily, obedient
and contented, well-trained and under suitable officers, terrible, and
ever alert. (4) The *Arborial fort* consists of the forest, with paths
unknown, densely packed with trees, thickets and creepers and thorns
extending far and wide. (5) The *Aquatic fort* consists of water which
has only one entrance and that narrow, full of poison and such aquatic
animals as are fond of touching, devouring and killing. (6) *Hilly fort*
consists of a mountain, which is inaccessible, beyond the reach of
arrows, fully equipped with all accessories and comforts.’

*Mahābhārata* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 199).—‘The king shall gather
for himself all the corn; what he cannot gather, that he shall burn; all
standing crops also he shall destroy; he shall demolish all passages in
rivers and over forts; he shall make all the water flow out; what cannot
flow out, that he shall pollute; he shall uproot all small trees near
about the fort; of the larger trees, he shall lop off all the branches.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘For the protection of his wife, wealth and people,
as also of stores, the king has to build a fort with double walls.’

*Matsya-purāṇa*. (Do., p. 203).—‘The fort shall be surrounded by a
ditch, equipped with walls and towers, as also with hundreds of guns and
other machines.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Do., Lakṣaṇa, p. 242).—‘The king shall build one of
the six kinds of forts.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 119).—‘In the middle of the settlement, he shall
establish a natural fort for purposes of war either in the form of an
enclosed island, or high ground surrounded by deep ditches, called the
water fort; or of stone, in the shape of caves, called the *hilly fort*;
caves, or barren ground devoid of water and grass, called the *Bow
fort*; Or of thicket-covered marshy land, called the *Arborial fort*. Of
these the Water and Hill forts are for defence and the Bow and Arborial
forts are for safety during times of distress.’
