+++
title = "072 त्रिण्य् आद्यान्य्"

+++
**(verse 7.71)**

*Matsya-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 203).—‘Of all forts, the
*Hilly fort* is the most highly commended.’

*Mahābhārata* (Do., p. 201).—‘Among the six kinds of forts laid down in
the scriptures, it is the *Human fort* that is the most inaccessible.’

*Śukranīti* (1.766).—‘The king should take shelter in hill forts in
times of great danger.’

Do. (4. 5, 2 *et seq*.).—‘Forts are made inaccessible by ditches,
thorns, rocks and deserts. The fort surrounded by ditches is called
*Parikhā*; that by walls of stone and bricks, *Parigha*; that by trees,
thorns and thickets *Vanadurga*; that near which there is no water is
called *Dhanvadurga*; that surrounded by large sheets of water is called
*Jaladurga*; that situated on high ground and supplied with plenty of
water is called *Giridurga*; that guarded by heroes versed in military
tactics is called *Sainyadurga*; that belonging to allies and relations
is the *Sahāyadurga*. The Sahāyadurga and the Sainyadurga arc the best
of all.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 204).—‘It should be equipped
with fuel, flavouring substances, canes, fodder, conveyances, machines
and weapons, and also well-disposed and brave soldiers. The king shall
also bring together, and provide livings for Brāhmaṇas learned in Vedic
lore and Kṣatriyas, also performers of Agṇihotra.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Do.).—‘Each one of these forts shall be supplied
with treasure and provisions, with elephants, horses and chariots,—also
with gems; it shall he fully supplied with machines, abounding in Vedic
learning, and equipped with all materials of war, well-stored with food
and money, supplied with drinks and water, fully supplied with
elephants, horses, chariots, cows, physicians and astrologers; also with
clarified butter, oils and medicines and other accessories; protected by
walls, ditches, towers and turrets.’

*Mahābhārata*—Śāntiparva (Parāśaramādhava Ācāra, p. 407).—‘Protected by
strong walls and ditches, supplied with elephants, horses and chariots,
with bright citizens, adorned with squares and markets, full of brave
and wise men.’
