+++
title = "078 पुरोहितञ् च"

+++
*Gautama* (11.12-18).—‘He shall select as his domestic priest, a
Brāhmaṇa who is learned, of noble family, eloquent, handsome, of proper
age, and of virtuous disposition, who lives righteously and is austere.
With his assistance, he shall fulfil his religious duties; for it is
declared in the Veda that “Kṣatriyas who are assisted by Brāhmaṇas
prosper and do not fall into trouble.” He shall also take heed of that
which astrologers and interpreters of omens tell him.... He shall
perforin in the Fire of the Hall the rites ensuring prosperity, which
are connected with *Śānti* (allaying of portents), festivals, a
prosperous march, long life and auspiciousness; as well as those that
are intended to cause enmity, to subdue enemies, to destroy them by
incantations, and to cause their misfortune. Officiating priests shall
perform for him the other sacrifices, according to the law.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.18.7, 8).—‘The king shall choose a domestic priest,
foremost in all transactions;—and shall act according to his
instructions.’

*Kāmandaka* (4.32).—‘A person well versed in the Vedic Triad and in the
Science of Government should he appointed as the Royal Priest; he shall
perform the *Śānti*, *Pauṣṭika* and other rites according to the Atharva
Veda.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (19. 3-6).—‘He shall appoint a domestic priest to perform
those rites that are obligatory for householders. It is declared in the
Veda that a realm where a Brāhmaṇa is appointed domestic priest,
prospers. Thus shall both his duties he fulfilled;—by himself alone the
king would be unable to do both.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.70).—‘He shall appoint as domestic priest a man conversant
with the Vedas, the Epics, the Institutes of Sacred Law, and the science
of what is useful in life,—of a good family, not deficient of limbs, and
persistent in the performance of austerities.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.312-313).—‘He shall appoint the domestic priest, who is
well versed in astrology, endowed with the aforesaid qualities, expert
in criminal law, and also in the *Atharvāṅgirasa* rites. For the
performance of *Śrauta* and *Smārta* rites, he shall appoint the
sacrificial priests and shall perform, according to law, sacrifices at
which large fees are paid.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 46).—‘He shall appoint as his domestic priest a person
whose family and character are well-known, who is well-instructed in the
Veda with the six subsidiaries, in portents and the science of
government, competent to allay all troubles from human and superhuman
sources hy means laid down in the Atharva Veda; him the king shall
follow as the pupil follows the teacher, the son the father, or the
servant the master.’
