+++
title = "130 पञ्चाशद्भाग आदेयो"

+++
See above, 10, 118 and 120.

*Gautama* (10.24, 25),—‘Cultivators should pay to the king a tax
amounting to one-tenth, one-eighth, or one-sixth of the produce. Some
declare that there is a tax also on cattle and gold, *viz*., one-fifth
of the stock.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.18.1).—‘The king shall protect his subjects, receiving
as his wage a sixth part of their incomes.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.42).—‘A king who rules according to the sacred law may
take the sixth part of the wealth of his subjects.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.22-24).—‘He should lake from his subjects as taxes a sixth
part of every ear of the corn, and a sixth part of all other seeds;—two
in the hundred, of cattle, gold and clothes.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 262).—‘Of awned grains,
the sixth part, of leguminous grains, the eighth part, shall be taken by
the king as the tax.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do., p. 263).—‘The cultivator shall pay to the king, (*a*)
the tenth, (*b*) eighth and (*c*) sixth parts of the produce (*a*) from
fallow land (*b*) of the autumn crop and (*c*) the spring crop,
respectively. “They shall pay taxes six-monthly or yearly, in accordance
with the custom of *the country*; such is the eternal duty of
cultivators.”

*Śukranīti* (4.2.212 *et. seq*.)—‘*Duty* is the king’s share received
from the buyer and the seller. The regions of the duty arc the
market-place, streets and mines. Duties are to he levied on goods only
once. The king should receive the thirty-second portion from the seller
or buyer. The twentieth or the sixteenth part is not a drawback upon the
price. The king shall not realise duty from the seller when he receives
what is less than cost price for his commodity; he shall realise it from
the buyer on finding him to be the gainer. Having ascertained the amount
of produce from the measured plots of land, the king shall demand
revenue, apportioning it among the cultivators. The king shall realise
rent from the peasant in such a way as may not ruin him. The king should
realise one-third, one-fourth, or one-half from places irrigated by
tanks, canals and wells, by rains and by rivers respectively, he should
have one-sixth from barren and rocky soils. If the king realises from
one cultivator 100 silver *kārṣāpaṇas*, he should refund to him 20
*Karṣas*. For minerals, the king shall realise duty at the following
rates after deducting the expenses incurred:—Half of gold, one-third of
silver, one-fourth of copper, one-sixth of zinc and iron, half of gems,
half of glass and lead. He should realise one-third, one-fifth,
one-seventh, one-tenth and one-twentieth from the collectors of grasses
and foods. He should have one-eighth of the increase of goats, sheep,
cows, buffaloes and horses, and one-sixteenth of the milk of buffaloes,
she-goats, and ewes. Artists and artisans he shall make work for him one
day in the fortnight. If the people start new industries or cultivate
new lands, dig tanks, canals or wells, etc., the king should not demand
anything from them until they have realised a profit double the amount
spent by them. Having determined the land-revenue for each village, the
king should receive it in advance from one rich man, or a guarantee of
monthly or periodical payments. He should realise the one-thirty-second
portion of the income of the money-lender. He should receive rents from
houses and cultivated lands; also land-tax from shopkeepers; for the
preservation and repairs of streets, he should realise dues from the
users.’
