+++
title = "142 एवं सर्वम्"

+++
*Gautama* (10.7.8).—‘To protect all created beings is the additional
duty of the king;—and to inflict lawful punishments.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.18.1).—‘The king shall protect his subjects, receiving
as his pay a sixth part of their incomes.’

*Āpastamba* (2.10.6).—‘The lawful occupations of a Kṣatriya are the same
(as the Brāhmaṇa’s),—with the exception of teaching, officiating as
priests and accepting gifts. But governing and fighting should he added
to them.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (19.1).—‘The particular duty of the king is to protect all
beings; by fulfilling it he obtains success in this world and in the
next.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.2).—‘The duties of the king are—to protect his people, etc.,
etc.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.334).—‘He shall protect the people harassed by
back-biters, thieves, wicked men and criminals and by Kāyasthas.’

*Rāmāyaṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 415).—‘The Kṣatriya, who governs the
world in accordance with law, obtains power and fame in the world and
also a happy state after death.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 94).—‘During the first eighth part of the day he shall
listen to reports relating to defence and income and expenditure; during
the second part he shall look into the suits of the citizens and
villages; during the third part he shall take his hath and food, and
also carry on Vedic Studies; during the fourth part he shall receive
monies and appoint officers; during the fifth part he shall hold counsel
with the cabinet of ministers regarding the despatches to be sent, and
hear reports from spies; during the sixth part he shall either hold
council or amuse himself as he likes; during the seventh part, he shall
inspect elephants, horses, chariots and arms; during the eighth part,
accompanied by the commander-in-chief, he shall discuss military
operations.—During the first part of the night, he shall see his
confidential officers; during the second part, he shall bathe and take
food and also carry on Vedic Studies; during the third part, he shall he
down to the accompaniment of music and sleep during the fourth and fifth
parts; during the sixth part, he shall rise to the accompaniment of
music, and ponder over the scriptures and the processes of business;
during the seventh part, he shall hold council and despatch spies;
during the eighth part, accompanied by the domestic priest, the
sacrificing priests and the Ācārya, he shall receive benedictions, see
the physician, the cook and the astrologer, and go out after having
circumambulated the cow with the calf and the bull.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 103).—‘On rising from the bed, he shall he attended by
women-archers; in the second apartment by eunuchs armoured and turbaned;
in the third, by hump-hacks dwarfs and foresters, and in the fourth, by
ministers, relatives and porters with spears.’
