+++
title = "147 गिरिपृष्ठं समारुह्य"

+++
**(verses 7.147-148)**

*Yājñavalkya* (1.313).—‘Kingship is based upon counsel; hence counsel
should be always so guarded as people may not know of it till it has
borne fruit.’

*Agnipurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 308).—‘The king shall keep his
counsel well-guarded; since from unguarded counsel follow troubles;
secret counsel is divulged by women and dishonoured persons.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 309).—‘The king should
always keep his counsel hidden; if he cannot keep it hidden he shall
surely fall into trouble. That king alone has the whole earth under his
power, whose acts are known only when they have been completed, and
never when they have only been begun. Kingship is based upon counsel;
hence counsel should be always kept well-guarded by kings.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 71).—‘The place for bolding counsel should be hidden,
from where no sound can escape and which shall not be visible even to
birds. None should enter it unless permitted by the king.

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 73).—‘The followers of Parāśara have held that the
best way of obtaining advice and yet keeping the project secret is to
place before the ministers not the actual project, but a hypothetical
case somewhat similar to it.—This is denied by Piśuna on the ground that
if questioned in regard to irrelevant issues, the councillors would
offer opinions without due consideration and to blab about it; therefore
the king shall hold counsel with only those councillors who may be known
as experts in the matter under consideration.—This also is not right,
says Kauṭilya; as in this case the number of councillors will have to be
endless; the king shall therefore hold counsel only with three or four
councillors. If only one were consulted he would talk without any
restraint, and the right conclusion would not be arrived at;—if two only
were consulted, there would be chances of collusion between them and the
king might he placed in a difficult situation. These dangers would he
avoided by consulting three or four men.’

*Kāmandaka* (11.72).—‘The king should hold counsel in a place on the
roof of his palace,—or in a forest, where there are no pillars, no
windows and no nook or corner. He should also see that he is not watched
by any one.’
