+++
title = "160 सन्धिञ् च"

+++
**(verses 7.160-161)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (3.39).—‘He shall resort, as the time demands, to the six
measures of making alliance and waging war, marching to battle and
halting, seeking shelter and help and distributing his forces.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.346).—‘He shall duly have recourse to alliance, war,
marching, sitting, seeking help and dividing his forces.’

*Arthaśāstra* (Part II, p. 237).—‘The circle of constituents forms the
source of the six Measures.—The six Measures are Alliance, War, Halting,
Marching, Seeking Shelter and Duplicity—say the Teachers. According to
Vātavyādhi, there are only two measures, all the six being included
under Alliance and War. Alliance consists in entering into treaty; War
in inflicting injury; Halting in disregarding; Marching in rising
against the enemy; Seeking Shelter in surrendering oneself to another;
and Duplicity in planning both peace and war.’

*Śukranīti* (4.7. 464, *et.seq*.).—‘The six constituents of state-craft
are—*Sandhi*, *Vigraha*, *Yāna*, *Āsana*, *Āśraya* and
*Dvaidhībhāva*;—*Sandhi*, Peace, is that by which a powerful enemy
becomes friendly;—*Vigraha*, War, is that by which the enemy is pressed
and subdued;—*Yāna* is marching for the furtherance of one’s own
interests and the destruction of the enemy’s;—*Āsana*, Entrenching, is
that step by which one protects himself but destroys the
enemy;—*Āśraya*, Seeking shelter, is that whereby even the weak becomes
strong;—*Dvaidhībhāva* is the stationing of one’s troops in several
directions.’

*Kāmandaka* (11.1).—‘There are six modes of foreign Policy—according to
some only two—Peace (including Duplicity and Shelter) and War (including
Marching and Halting).
