+++
title = "217 तत्रात्मभूतैः कालज्ञैर्"

+++
*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 161).—‘He shall touch no
food or bed or clothes or ornament until it has been tested.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.85).—‘He shall not taste any food that has not been tried
before.’

*Kāmandaka* (7.9).—‘The King should always be careful regarding his
conveyances, beds, seats, drinks, eatables, garments and ornaments and
everything else. He should shun these, even if the slightest suspicion
of their being poisoned is present.’

Do. (7.11, *et. seq*.).—‘*Bhṛṅgarāja*, *Śuka* and *Sārikā* emit
distressful notes at the sight of a venomous serpent. At the sight of
poison, the eyes of the *Chakora* lose their natural hue; the *Krauñca*
is visibly intoxicated; and the *Kokila*, becoming mad, perishes. At the
sight of poison, a feeling of languor always takes possession of
creatures.’

Examining, by means of one of those methods, his eatables, the King
shall eat them.

In order to test the rice offered to him, the king shall at first throw
some of it on fire, and then some to the birds and watch the effects. If
there is poison in the rice the flame and fumes will assume a blue
colour and there will be crackling sounds; and the birds eating the rice
will die. Curry contaminated with poison soon becomes juiceless and
vapid; when decocted, it yields blue spume, and then its flavour, etc.,
are destroyed; etc., etc., etc.’

*Śukranīti* (1.653-657).—‘For fear of poisons the king should examine
his food through monkeys and cocks. At the very sight of poisoned food,
drakes begin to limp, bees to hum, peacocks to dance, cocks to crow,
cranes to get intoxicated, monkeys to pass stools, rats to become
excited, birds to vomit. Thus is the food to be examined.’
