+++
title = "009 षट्-कर्मैको भवत्य्"

+++
‘*Ṣaṭkarma*’—Medhātithi is again misrepresented by Buhler. (See
*Translation*); the ‘six’ described by him are (1) ‘*uñcha*,’ (2)
‘*śila*,’ (3) ‘*ayācitalābha*,’ (4) ‘*yācitalābha*,’ (5) ‘*kṛṣi*’ and
(6) ‘*vāṇijya*’; and he adds that ‘Teaching, sacrificing for others and
receiving gifts’ are included under ‘*yācita-ayācitalābha*’—they are
those mentioned in verses 5 and 6, according to Govindarāja, which
agrees with Medhātithi;—those mentioned in 5 and 6, excepting ‘service’
and substituting in its place ‘money-lending,’ according to Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda;—according to Nārāyaṇa, those mentioned in verses 5 and 6,
and also those enumerated in 1.88;—those mentioned in 1. 88, according
to Nandana, which explanation Medhātithi notes and rejects.

‘*Tribhiḥ*’—Here also Buhler misrepresents Medhātithi; Medhātithi does
not restrict ‘three’ to the ‘first three mentioned in verses 5-6’; what
he clearly says is ‘any three out of those mentioned excepting
agriculture and trade’;—‘teaching, sacrificing and accepting gifts’
(Govindarāja, Kullūka, Rāghavānanda and Nandana);—‘teaching, sacrificing
and accepting gifts, as also the first three mentioned in verses 5-6’
(Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Dvābhyām*’—Here also what Medhātithi says is—*any* *two* out of the
three just recommended, excepting *gifts received for asking*—and not
‘gleaning and accepting voluntary gifts’ as stated by
Buhler;—‘sacrificing and teaching’ (Govindarāja Kullūka, Rāghavānanda
and Nandana);—‘gleaning ears and single grains’ (Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Brahmasattra*’—‘Any one of the two, gleaning ears and gleaning single
grains’ (Medhātithi and Nārāyaṇa);—‘teaching’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka,
Rāghavānanda and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 169), which adds the following
notes:—‘*ṣaṭkarma*’ stands for the six occupations of sacrificing for
others, offering sacrifices and the rest, that have been recommended for
the Brāhmaṇa; and these are referred to for the purpose of prescribing
the three occupations of receiving gifts and the
rest;—‘*tribhiranyaḥ*’—*i*. *e*., for the ‘*kumbhīdhānya*’ also the
three occupations are enjoined;—‘*dvābhyām ekaḥ*’,—this permits
sacrificing and teaching for the *Tryahaihika*,—the receiving of gifts
being forbidden, as they may come from evil persons;—the fourth,
‘*Aśvastana*’ should live by ‘*Brahmasattra*’, *i. e*., teaching alone.
Thus it follows that the ‘*Kusūladhānya*’ and the rest are meant for the
Brāhmaṇa only; as the receiving of gifts and the rest are not possible
for any other caste.

*Mitākṣarā* (on 1.128) quotes the verse in support of the view that the
first refers to ‘sacrificing, teaching, receiving gifts, agriculture,
trade and cattle-tending,’—the second to ‘sacrificing, teaching and
receiving gifts,’—the third to ‘sacrificing and teaching’ and the fourth
to ‘teaching’ only.

The verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 216), which provides an
explanation more in keeping with Medhātithi’s:—The *Kusūladhyāna* has
six occupations,—viz. *uñcha*, *śila, ayācita, yācita, kṛṣi* and
*vāṇijya*;—the other, ‘*Kumbhīdhānya*’ lives by three—*i.e*., *uñcha,
śila* and *ayācita*;—the ‘*Tryahaihika*’ by two—*i.e., uñcha* and
*śila*;—and ‘*Aśvastanika*’ by the ‘*Brahmasattra*’ *i.e*., by the u *ñ*
cha alone, which leads him to the ‘regions of Brahman, and as such is
equal to the *Sattra sacrifice*.’

The verse is quoted also in *Vidhānapārijāta* (II. p. 247), which
explains the ‘six occupations’ to be ‘sacrificing, teaching, receiving
gifts, agriculture, trade and cattle-tending;—and in *Saṃskāramayūkha*
(p. 131), which explains the meaning as follows:—Some people live by the
six means—officiating at sacrifices, teaching, receiving gifts,
agriculture, trade and cattle-tending;—others by three only *viz*.,
receiving gifts, teaching and officiating at sacrifices; others by two
only *i.e*., by officiating at sacrifices and teaching; and others again
by one only, teaching; among these each succeeding one is superior to
the preceeding ones.


