+++
title = "052 प्रत्य्-अग्निम् प्रति-सूर्यम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 42), which adds that this
applies to cases where, on account of mist or fog, the man is unable to
ascertain the directions.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 30), which adds the
following explanation:—During the night, in shade or in darkness,—and
during the day, in shade or in darkness caused by fog etc.,—and during
suffering to life caused by disease etc.,—and in danger due to thieves,
tiger and such other things;—Kullūka Bhaṭṭa reads ‘*prāṇabādhābhayeṣu*’
and explains it to man ‘when there is danger to life at the hands of
thieves etc.,’—‘one should do’—*i.e*., the ‘*mūtrocchārasamutsargam*’
(of the preceding verse). This verse supplies an exception to the law
regarding the facing of the North or the East etc.; so that this latter
law remains applicable to the day, when there is light, and also to the
night when there is moon-light. This view has the support of
*Kalpataru*. In view of the present verse specifying ‘day and night’,
the facing of the North remains compulsory at the two twilights. The
author of *Smṛticandrikā*, Mādhavācḥārya, Kullūka Bhaṭṭa and others have
held the view that the first half applies to cases where one has lost
all sense of direction; but this view has been rejected on the ground
that there is no authority for restricting the rule in this manner.

This is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 329);—in *Vidhānapārijāta* (II, p.
152), which also adds that this refers to cases where the man has lost
all sense of direction;—and in *Aparārka* (p. 34).


