+++
title = "092 ब्राह्मे मुहूर्ते"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 158);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Ācāra, p. 206), which explains ‘*Vedatattvārtha*’ as ‘the Supreme
Self’;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p, 204);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p.
13), which explains ‘*Brāhma muhūrta*’ as ‘the last quarter of the
night’, and adds that the time is so called because it is the time for
the awakening of *Brāhmī*, *i.e*., Bhāratī, the goddess of speech; and
that the term ‘*muhūrta*’ is to be taken as standing for *time* in
general, and not in the restricted technical sense of a period of 48
minutes; and this on the ground that 48 minutes would not suffice for
all those acts that are prescribed for being done after rising and
before sunrise. It goes on to add that according to other *Nibandhas*,
the last but one *Muhūrta* (48 minutes) of the night is called ‘Brāhma’,
because it is sacred to Brahman. The conclusion that it arrives at is
that those who have to perform all the acts of Vedic study and the rest
should rise in the beginning of the last quarter of the night, *i.e*.,
at 3 a.m. while others in the third *Muhūrta* of that quarter, *i.e*.,
after 4-36 a.m. It explains ‘*Tanmūlān*’ as ‘due to those acts that are
done for the sake of Dharma and Artha’; and the purpose for which all
this is to be pondered over is that if the labour involved in a certain
act is much, while the resultant Dharma or Artha is little, then it is
to be avoided.—‘*Vedatattvārtha*’—here the term ‘*tattva*’ has been
added for the purpose of excluding such meanings as might be deduced by
wrong methods of interpretation; or ‘*Vedatattvārtha*’ might stand for
Brahman.

This verse is quoted in *Ācāramayūkha* (p. 4), which explains
‘*Vedatattvārtha*’ as god, but quotes Śrīdatta to explain it as
‘*nyāyapratītor’thaḥ*’; it explains ‘*brāhmamuhūrta*’ as the last but
one *muhūrta* of the night.


