+++
title = "095 श्रावण्याम् प्रौष्ठपद्याम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.142) to the effect that the
Veda is to be studied for four months and a half;—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Ācāra, p. 518), which explains the compound ‘*ardhapāñcamān*’ as
‘*ardham pāñcamam yeṣām*’, *i.e*., four months and a half; and adds that
if on the day here specified there happen to be such conditions
antagonistic to study, as the non-appearance of the Venus and the
like—then the Upākarma should be performed on the Full-moon day of the
month of *Āṣāḍha*.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 499);—and in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 84), which also explains the compound
‘*ardhapañcamān*’ as ‘*ardhāḥ pañcamo māso yeṣām*’;—*i.e*., for four
months and a half, counting from the day on which the *Upākarma*
ceremony is performed. It adds that this rule is applicable, not to the
Student only, but to the House-holder also.

It is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 512), which adds that according to
the explanation provided by Hemādri, the particle ‘*api*’ is meant to
include the fifth day of the month of *Bhādrapada* as another
alternative day.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 186), which explains the construction
as—‘*Chandāṃsi upākṛtya tāni ardhapañcamān māsān adhīyīta*’; and
explains the compound ‘*ardhapāñcamān*’ as ‘*ardhaḥ pāñcamo māso
yeṣām*’;—the meaning being that from the day that the *Upākarma* is
performed, the man should go on studying the Veda for four months and a
half;—in *Puruṣārthacintāmaṇi* (p. 298) as laying down Vedic study to be
done during four months and a half, during both the dark and the bright
fortnights;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 396), which adds that the particle
‘*api*’ is meant to imply the ‘*Bhādrapada—Śravaṇā—Hastā* and
*Pañcamī*’;—in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 171), which says that the
*Chandogas* are to do the *Upākarma* on the Full-moon day of
*Bhādrapada*, while all others are to do it on the same day in
*Śrāvaṇa*;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 147), which explains
‘*yuktaḥ*’ as ‘with due application.’


