+++
title = "104 एतांस् त्व्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 530), which notes
that the ‘*agniprāduṣkaraṇa*’ indicates the *morning twilight*; and that
this *Anadhyāya* also is to be *ākālikā* (see verse 103);—in *Hemādri*
(Kāla, p. 761);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 58) in support of the view that
the phenomena referred to should occur in the evening, or morning, and
that there is no ‘holiday’ due to the mere appearance of clouds during
the rainy season; it quotes

*Dharmaprakāśa* to the effect that ‘*prāduṣkṛtāgniṣu*’ (morning and
evening) is to be taken with the ‘appearance of clouds’ also;—in
*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 194);—in *Varṣakriyākaumudī* (p. 566),
which explains ‘*prāduṣkṛtāgniṣu*’ as ‘at the times when the fire is
kindled for the morning and evening Libations’, *i.e*., morning and
evening, and the verse as meaning—‘when the three phenomena of lightning
and the rest are perceived during the season (Rains), then one day and
night should be treated as holiday’, and *apart from the Rainy season*,
if mere clouds appear in the morning or evening, one day and night
should be observed; but not so during the rains; the particle ‘*ca*’
implies that when lightning and thunder are heard apart from the Rainy
season, there will be a holiday for one day and night;—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 149), which explains ‘*prāduṣkaraṇa*’, as
‘*viharaṇa*’, furbishing,—and says it denotes the Twlights.

*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 197) quotes the opinion of *Kalpataru* to
the effect that on the appearance of each of the phenomena individually,
only the time of the appearance is to be treated as holiday. It adds
that the accepted practice is that whenever dense clouds appear, apart
from the Rains, it is treated as a holiday.


