+++
title = "106 प्रादुष्कृतेष्व् अग्निषु"

+++
“If these sounds are heard in the morning twilight, there should be no
study till the sun is up; when they are heard in the evening twilight,
there is to be no reading till the stars appear;—or if the two
disturbances occur, the intermission lasts as long as the sun or stars
remain; but if it also rains, then, as long as the day and night”
(Kullūka).—For ‘*śeṣe*’ Medhātithi notes another reading ‘*śeṣam*’ and
explains it to mean that ‘on the day that one offers the *Jyotiṣṭoma*
and other well-known sacrifices, the *śeṣa, remainder* of that day, is
to be regarded as *unfit for study*.’

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 526), which adds
that this refers to the Rainy season,—in other seasons, the whole day
and night is unfit for study;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 763), which has the
following notes:—When the phenomenon appears in the morning the holiday
extends as long as the Sun does not set, and if in the evening, then
till the setting of the stars; ‘*śeṣe*’, *i.e*., if it comes to rain,
then it is holiday during the day as well as during the night;—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 56), which has the following notes—‘*Prāduṣkṛteṣu*
*etc*.,’ *i.e*., the morning and evening,—‘*sajyotiḥ*’ means that if it
happens in the evening then the whole night is ‘holiday’—‘*śeṣe*’, if it
rains, then the whole day and night; all this only when it occurs during
the Rainy season; in other seasons, these phenomena lead to a three
days’ holiday;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 150), which has the same
note, but explains ‘*śeṣe*’ as ‘*ṛtau*’;—in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla,
p. 194);—and in *Varṣakriyākaumudī* (p. 566), which has ṭhe following
notes:—This lays down special rules regarding mere thundering during the
rains: if there is thundering in the morning, the entire day time is to
be kept as holiday; and if it occurs in the evening, then the night
only; ‘*śeṣe*’, *i.e*., on the occasion of the thunder and the rest
developing into rain, both the day and night are to be observed. The
‘Rainy season’ is here meant to stand for all the four months during
which there are rains. —*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla p. 197) notes that
there is to be holiday when there is not merely rain, but rain
accompanied by lightning and thunder, according to the rule as laid down
in the first part of the verse; the last part sets forth the rule for
cases of rain only.


