+++
title = "110 प्रतिगृह्य द्विजो"

+++
‘*Ekoddiṣṭa*’—Burnell was right in rendering this as ‘to one ancestor,’
and Hopkins is *not* right in changing it into ‘to one recently
deceased.’ As a matter of fact ‘*Ekoddiṣṭa*’ is the name applied to the
*Śrāddha* to a *single* person,—as distinguished from the *Pāravaṇa*
which is offered to *six* ancestors,—whether he has died long ago or
only recently.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 190), which explains ‘*Ketanam*’
as ‘invitation’,—at this, and on an eclipse, either one day or three
days should be unfit for study,—‘*Rāhusūtaka*’ meaning ‘the sign of
Rāhu;’—in the *Dānakriyākaumudī* (p. 99), as forbidding study for three
days from the day of invitation;—in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 195),
which adds the same note and explains ‘*Ketana*’ as ‘invitation’;—in
*Prāyaścittaviveka*, (p. 407), which explains ‘*Ketana*’ as
‘invitation,’ and ‘*pratigraha*’ as ‘the acceptance of a gift made by
the donor for gaining spiritual merit’;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 58),
which has the following notes:—Some people say that it is not right that
in the case of the Śrāddha on death, the invited should desist from
study only till the food eaten has become digested, and in that of
subsequent *Ekoddiṣṭas* it should be for three days; and they hold that
the former is meant for cases of *unintentional* eating and the latter
for those of *intentional* eating;—the writer himself holds the view
that the ‘three days’ are meant for cases of *first* Śrāddha also;’—in
*Puruṣārthacintāmaṇi* (p. 442);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p.
153).—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.146) to the effect that an invitation to an
Ekoddiṣṭa means the omission of study for three days;—in *Hemādri*
(Kāla, p. 756);—and in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 171).


