+++
title = "129 न स्नानम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 135);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Āhnika, p. 159), which adds that what the first quarter forbids is
‘that bathing which one may do voluntarily, without any occasion, after
having taken his food’; it cannot refer to the obligatory daily bathing,
which must precede the breakfast; nor can it refer to the bathing that
is rendered necessary by the touching of a *cāṇḍāla* or other unclean
things, since it has been laid down that ‘one should not remain unclean
for a single moment.’ \[This it quotes as from Medhātithi\];—then even
after food, if such occasions should arise as an eclipse and the like,
one must bathe;—‘*āturaḥ*’ is explained as ‘one suffering from a disease
likely to be aggravated by bathing’,—and ‘*mahāniśā*’ as the second and
third quarters of the night;—the phrase ‘*na vāsobhiḥ*’ is explained as
indicating that on those occasions on which it is laid down that one
should bathe ‘along with his clothes,’ there would be nothing wrong in
doing so even when one is wearing several pieces of cloth.—‘*Ajasram*’
means ‘constantly.’—The bathing that is forbidden here is such as is
done by men either through sheer foolishness or through false notions of
purity,—and not that which becomes necessary on one’s arrival at a
sacred place.—‘*Avijñāte*’—means those ‘water-reservoirs’ in regard to
which it is not known whether they are deep or otherwise, free or not
from alligators and other animals, dug by respectable men or otherwise,
and duly consecrated or not.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 246);—in *Kālaviveka* (p. 340);—in
*Smṛtitattva, on* p. 38, where it is added that what is forbidden is
*frequent bathing*, as is clear from the adverb ‘*ajasram*’;—on p. 160,
where it adds that the prohibition of bathing at night does not apply to
bathing at an eclipse;—and on p. 365, where it is explained as referring
to that bathing which is done for the mere love of doing it,—and not to
that which is rendered necessary on certain occasions and circumstances,
nor to the daily bathing;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 708), which has the
following notes:—‘*Bhuktvā*,’ this prohibition does not refer to the
ordinary daily bath; nor to the bath necessitated by the touch of the
Cāṇḍāla, as that impurity must be got rid of immediately; it must refer
to the voluntary bath for mere pleasure;—as regards the ‘*ātura*,’
sick-person, the full bath is forbidden for him at all
times;—‘*ajasram*’ means ‘constantly’;—also in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p.
857);—in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 306), which has the same note, and says
such is the opinion of Medhātithi; it is only the ordinary bath (not
religious) that is forbidden at ‘dead of night’ and ‘constantly,’ so
also ‘*avijñāte*.’ &c.—which means ‘that water-reservoir in regard to
which it is not known how deep it is or whether or not it is
objectionable in any way’;—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 273).


