+++
title = "210 स्तेन-गायनयोश् चाऽन्नम्"

+++
‘*Baddhasya nigaḍasya*;’—‘One who is only verbally confined *and* one
who is bound with cords or iron chains’ (Medhātithi);—‘one *bound with
chains*’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.290);—in *Madanapārijāta* (p.
944);—in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 451);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 495)
which adds the following notes:—‘*Stena*’ is ‘one who takes away what
belongs to another,’—‘*gāyana*’ is ‘one who makes a living by
singing,’—‘*takṣan*’ is ‘one who has carpentery for his livelihood,’—and
‘*Vārdhuṣika*’ is ‘one who makes a living by charging improper rates of
interest, or by making undue profits by trade; and adds that the term is
also applied to one who brags of his own superior virtues and decries
others’—this on the strength of a text quoted from Viṣṇu;—‘*dīkṣita*’ is
‘one who has been consecrated by means of the *Dīkṣaṇīya-Iṣṭi*,’—whose
food should not be eaten prior to the ceremony of purchasing the Soma,
or before the *Agnīṣomīya vapāyāga*;—‘*kadarya*’ is ‘the miser,’ defined
by Devala as ‘one who, through greed for amassing wealth, causes
suffering to himself, his wife and children, as also hinders the right
fulfilment of his religious duties’;—‘*baddhasya*’ means ‘bound with
ropes,’ or ‘bound only verbally,’—and ‘*nigaḍasya*’ means ‘one who is
*in chains*’; though ‘*nigaḍa*’ means ‘chains’ only, yet it stands here
for one who is *in chains*; \[this is as Medhātithi has explained the
terms\]; or the genitive in ‘*nigaḍasya*’ may be taken in the sense of
the instrumental, so that, the two words ‘*baddhasya nigaḍasya*’ may be
taken together as ‘*nigadena baddhasya*’ (one bound in chains);—this
according to *Kalpataru*.

This is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 710);—and in
*Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 260), which defines ‘*Vārdhuṣika*’ according to
Yama as ‘one who buys things cheap, and sells them dear, as also one who
makes a living by lending money on interest’; and explains ‘*dīkṣitaḥ*’
as ‘the person who has performed the *Dīkṣaṇīya Iṣṭi*’; his food is
forbidden till the end of the sacrifice in connection with which that
Iṣṭi has been performed,—and ‘*kadarya*’as ‘he who amasses wealth at the
cost of much discomfort to himself, his religious performances, his wife
and children;—‘*baddhasya*,’ one who is tied with a rope,—‘*nigaḍa*,’
chain.


