+++
title = "211 अभिशस्तस्य षण्ढस्य"

+++
‘*Śūdrasyocchiṣṭam*’—‘Food of a Śūdra, and the leavings of any man’
(Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa);—‘the leavings of a Śūdra’ (Medhātithi,
Rāghavānanda, Govindarāja and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3. 290);—in *Smṛtitattva* (p.
451) which explains ‘*paryuṣitam*’ as ‘food kept overnight’, and
‘*ucchiṣṭa*’ as ‘leavings’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 495)
which adds the following notes:—‘*Abhiśasta*’ is ‘one accused of such
crimes as make one outcast,’—‘*ṣaṇḍaka*’ is
‘hermaphrodite,’—‘*puṃścalī*’ is ‘unchaste woman,’—‘*dāmbhika*’ is ‘the
religious hypocrite,’—‘*śukta*’ is that which has been very much soured
by the contact of the juice of other things,—‘*paryuṣita*’ is ‘food kept
over-night,’ even though not soured;—according to Haradatta, food cooked
during the day becomes ‘*paryuṣita*’ after sunset, and that cooked
during the night becomes so after sunrise;—one should not eat the
‘leavings’ of a Śūdra; though the eating of all ‘leavings’ has been
forbidden, yet that of the Śūdra has been specified for the purpose of
indicating that this is doubly objectionable;—or the meaning of the
clause ‘*śūdrasyocchiṣṭam*’ may be that ‘one should not eat a Śūdra’s
food, nor the leavings of any person’;—or ‘out of the dish out of which
a Śūdra has eaten and left some food.’

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 772);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka*
(p. 250) which explains ‘*ṣaṇḍaka*’ as ‘sexless’; and adds that of
‘*śaktu*’ and ‘*paryuṣita*’ food, only repeated eating involves
expiation.


