+++
title = "212 चिकित्सकस्य मृगयोः"

+++
‘*Ugra*’—‘A man of the *Ugra* caste’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Nārāyaṇa
and Nandana)—‘a king’ (suggested by Medhātithi, and Govindarāja);—‘one
who perpetrates dreadful deeds’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.290);—in *Smṛtitattva* (p.
451), which adds the following notes:—The food that has been cooked for
the newly-delivered woman should not he eaten by members of her
family;—‘*paryācānta*’—when several men are eating in a line, if any one
of them happen to rinse his mouth, the others should not continue to
eat;—‘*anirdaśam*’ is the food of a man who has not got rid of the
impurity due to child-birth.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 945);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Āhnika, p. 495), which adds—‘*chikitsaka*’ is ‘one who makes a living
by administering medicine’;—‘*mṛgayu*’ is one who kills animals by means
other than arrows, *i.e*., by means of traps and such
contrivances;—‘*Krūra*’ is the man who harbours within him much anger,
*i.e*., ill-tempered;—‘*ucchiṣṭabhojī*’—who eats such leavings as are
forbidden;—‘*ugra*’ is one who does cruel deeds, or one who is *born of
a Kṣatriya father and* Vaiśya mother, or a king;—‘*Sūtikānnam*’—the food
that has been cooked for a newly-delivered woman should not be eaten
even by members of her own family;—‘*paryācāntam*,’—when several men are
eating in a line, if some one should ignore the presence of others and
rinse his mouth, then the food before the others becomes ‘*paryācānta*’;
but there is no harm if the person rinsing his mouth happen to be one’s
‘elder’;—or ‘*paryācānta*’ may be explained as that food over which the
water of mouth-washing has been thrown;—‘*anirdaśam*’ is the food of a
person still impure by reason of child-birth.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 772);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka*
(p. 200) which has the following notes:—‘*sūtikānnam*’, food cooked for
a woman newly delivered; ‘within ten days of the delivery’
(‘*anirdaśam*’), according to the commentator who says that
‘*anirdaśam*’ qualifies ‘*sūtikānnam*’;—‘*paryācāntam*’, which is in
close proximity to the water dropped in rinsing the mouth.


