+++
title = "213 अनर्चितं वृथा-मांसम्"

+++
‘*Nagaryannam*’—‘Food given by the lord of a city, even though he may
not be a king’ (Medhātithi); ‘food belonging to a whole town’ (Kullūka
and Govindarāja).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.290);—and in *Smṛtitattva* (p.
451) which says—‘*anarcita*’ is that which is given in an insulting
manner; ‘*vṛthā-māṃsa*’ is that which has not been prepared for offering
to the gods and Pitṛs;—the ‘*avīrā*’ woman is one who has no husband or
son; this prohibition applies to only such women as are not related to
one’s self;—‘*nagaryanna*’ is the food belonging to the master of a
city;—‘*avakṣuta*’ is that over which some one has sneezed.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 945);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Āhnika, p. 495), which adds the following notes:—‘*anarcita*’,—the food
is so called when it is offered without due respect, to one who deserves
respect;—‘*vṛthāmāṃsa*’ is that meat which has not been cooked for
offering to the gods and Pitṛs;—‘*avīrā*’ is a woman without husband or
sons, or grandsons or great-grandsons; this prohibition applies to the
case of an unrelated woman, such being the custom, says
Śūlapāṇi;—‘*dviṣat*’,—is one who causes injury;—‘*nagarī*’ is the master
of a city, even though he may not be the king, says
Medhātithi;—‘*patita*’ is the Brāhmaṇa-murderer and the
like;—‘*avakṣutam*’—sneezed upon.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 773);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka*
(p. 260), which adds the following notes:—‘*Anarcitam*’, rejected as
bad,—‘*avīrā*’, a woman without husband or sons or any male
relatives,—‘*nagarī*’ means a ‘person in charge of a
city’,—‘*avakṣutam*’, which has been sneezed upon.


