+++
title = "001 एवङ् गृहाश्रमे"

+++
**(verses 6.1-2)  
**

*Gautama* (3.1).—‘Some people declare that he who has studied the Veda
may make his choice regarding the particular stage that he will enter.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.11.14).—‘A hermit is one who regulates his conduct
according to the institutes proclaimed by Vikhānas.’

*Āpastamba* (2.21.1-2, 18-10).—‘There are four stages—that of the
Householder, that of the Student, that of the Renunciate and that of the
Hermit. If he lives in all these four according to the law, without
allowing himself to he disturbed, he will obtain salvation. Only after
completing studentship shall he go forth as a Hermit.’

*Āpastamba*. (2.22.78).—‘After having finished the study of the Veda,
having taken a wife and kindled the sacred fires, he shall begin the
rites ending with the Soma-sacrifices, performing as many as are
prescribed in the Veda:—afterwards he shall build a dwelling outside the
village and dwell there with his children and wife.’

*Āpastamba* (2.21.8).—‘After having fulfilled the duties of the Student,
he shall go forth as a Renunciate.’

*Āpastamba* (2.24.14).—‘He may accomplish his objects as he pleases;
there is no reason to place any one order before the other.’

*Viṣṇu* (94.1-2).—‘A householder, when he sees his skin wrinkled and his
hair turned grey, must go to live in a forest; or when he sees the son
of his son.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.45).—‘Entrusting his wife to his sons, or accompanied
by his wife, the Hermit, taking the vow of celibacy, shall repair to the
forest, along with his tires and the *Upāsanās*.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 940).—‘Having lawfully begotten children, having
performed the sacrifices to the best of his ability, and having seen his
son’s child, the Brāhmaṇa shall repair to the forest.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do.).—‘Having begotten children, having performed
their sacraments, taught them the Veda, provided them with the means of
living, united them to their wives, entrusting his family to his son,
and making preparations for departure, he should have recourse to
special means of livelihood. In due course, after having passed through
the *Yāyāvara* stage, he should repair to the forest.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘faking with himself the sacrificial implements, the
sacred fire, the cows and other accessories, and accompanied by his
wife, the twice-born man shall repair to the forest.’

*Jābāla* (Parāśaramādhava, Ācāra, p. 525).—‘Having completed religious
studentship, one shall become a Householder; after having become a
House-holder, he shall go out.’

*Chāgalega* (Do., p. 526).—‘Being without his wife, he shall deposit his
fire in himself, and the Brāhmaṇa shall go out of his house.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.17.2-5)—‘Some teachers say that he who has finished his
studentship may become a renunciate immediately on the completion of
that; hut according to others, renunciation is fit only for those
*Śālīnas* and *Yāyāvaras* who are childless, or a widower; in general
they prescribe renunciation after the completion of the seventieth year,
after the children have been finally settled in their sacred duties.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (7.1-3).—‘There are four orders: the Student, the
Householder, the Hermit and the Renunciate; a man who has studied one,
two or three Vedas without violating the rules of studentship may enter
any of these, whichsoever he pleases.’

*Kāmandaka* (2.27-28).—‘The duties of the Hermit are to keep matted
hair, to perform Agnihotra, to sleep on the bare ground, to wear black
deer-skin, to live in solitary places, to sustain himself on water,
succulent roots, Nīvāra corn and fruits, to refuse alms, to bathe
thrice, to observe vows and to adore gods and guests.’
