+++
title = "003 सन्त्यज्य ग्राम्यम्"

+++
*Gautama* (3.26).—‘A hermit shall live in the forest subsisting on roots
and fruits, practising austerities; he shall kindle the fire under the
*Śramaṇaka rules*, he shall eat wildgrowing vegetables only.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.11.15).—‘A hermit shall live in the forest, subsisting
on roots and fruits, practising austerities and bathing at morn, noon
and eve, he shall kindle a fire according to the Śramaṇaka rule; he
shall eat wild-growing vegetables and grains only; he shall worship
gods, Pitṛs, elementals, men and sages; he shall receive hospitably men
of all castes, except those intercourse with whom is forbidden; he may
even use the flesh of animals killed by carnivorous beasts; he shall not
step on ploughed land; and he shall not enter a village; he shall wear
his hair in braids and dress in bark or skins; he shall not eat anything
that has been hoarded more than a year.’

*Āpastamba* (2.21.18-21).—‘Now follow the rules regarding the hermit
living in the woods;—only after completing studentship shall he go
forth, remaining chaste. He shall keep one fire only, have no house,
enjoy no pleasures, have no protector, observe silence, uttering speech
on the occasion of the daily recitation of the Veda only.’

*Viṣṇu* (94.3).—‘Let him entrust the care of his wife to his sous, or
let her accompany him.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.45).—‘Wearing his beard and hair in braids,
self-controlled, he shall maintain, with things obtained without
ploughing, the fires, Pitṛs, gods, guests and dependants.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 941).—‘Uncultivated grains, roots and fruits, Vrīhi
corn,—having gathered these and other sacrificial food, he shall offer
these at the great Five Great sacrifices.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (9.4).—‘He shall gather wild-growing roots and fruits only.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 30).—‘For the hermit—celibacy, sleeping on the ground,
wearing matted locks and skins, performing Agnihotra and Baths,
worshipping gods, Pitṛs and guests and living on wild-growing things.’
