+++
title = "018 सद्यः प्रक्षालको"

+++
*Gautuma* (3.35).—‘He shall not eat anything that has been hoarded for
more than a year.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.11.15).—(See under 3.)

*Baudhāyana* (3.2.11-18)—‘As regards the mode of life called
*Samprakṣālanī*, in order to see that there is no waste of the
substances obtained, nor any hoarding, he overturns the dishes and
washes them. In the mode called *Samūhā*, he sweeps up grain with a
broom in permitted places where grain-bearing plants are found, either
on a road or in fields, access to which is not obstructed, and lives on
what is thus obtained. In the mode called *Pālanī*, which is also called
*Ahiṃsakā*, he tries to obtain from virtuous men husked rice or seeds
and maintains himself thereby. In the mode called *Śiloñcha*, he gleans
single ears of corn in permitted places where grainbearing plants grow,
or on roads, or in fields, access to which is not obstructed, and
supports himself by these gleanings, collected from time to time. In the
method called *Kapota*, he picks up with two fingers single grains in
permitted places where grain-bearing plants grow, either on the road or
in fields, access to which is not obstructed; this is acting like a
pigeon, *Kapota*. In the mode called *Siddhoñcha*, tired with other
modes of subsistence, and because he has become old or diseased, he asks
virtuous men for cooked food. If he subsists on the produce of the
forest, of trees, creepers and lianas and grasses, such as wild millet
and wild sesamum, that is called *forest-life*.’

*Āpastamba* (2.23.1).—‘If he desires to perform great austerities, he
shall collect food only day by day, in the morning, in his vessel.’

*Viṣṇu* (94.11).—‘He should collect provisions, after the manner of the
pigeon, for a month; or he should collect them for a year.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.47).—(See under 15.)
