+++
title = "033 वनेषु च"

+++
**(verses 6.33-34)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (2.17.1-6).—‘Now we shall explain the rule for entering the
order of Renunciates. Some say that he who has finished his studentship
may become a renunciate immediately after that. But according to others
renunciation is fit only for such *Śālīnas* and *Yāyāvaras* as are
childless, or widowers. In general, they prescribe renunciation after
the completion of the seventieth year and after the children have been
firmly settled in their sacred duties. Or a Hermit may become a
Renunciate on the completion of the special rites prescribed for him.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.17.15-17).—‘It is declared in the Veda that “entering
stage after stage man becomes one with Brahman.” They quote also the
following verse—“Ho who has passed from stage to stage, has offered
burnt oblations and kept his organs under subjection, becomes
afterwards, tired with giving alms and making offerings, a Renunciate.
Such a Renunciate becomes one with the Infinite.’

*Viṣṇu* (96.1).—‘After having passed through the first three stages, and
having annihilated passion, he should offer an oblation to Prajāpati in
which he gives away all his belongings as the sacrificial fee, and enter
the stage of the Renunciate.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.55-56).—‘Passing on from the stage of the Householder
or from that of the Hermit, he shall perform the sacrifice to Prajāpati,
at which he gives away all his belongings as the sacrificial fee, and on
its completion, withdrawing the fires within himself, he shall turn his
mind towards Liberation, after having studied the Veda, performed
*Japa*, begotten sons, made gifts of food, maintained the fires, and
performed sacrifices to the best of his capacity.’

*Jābāla-smṛti* (Aparārka, p. 946).—‘Having completed Studentship, he
shall become a Householder; after having been a Householder, he shall
become a Hermit; after having been a Hermit he shall go forth as a
Renunciate; or he may go forth directly after Studentship or
Householdership or Hermitship.’

*Jābāla* (Parāśaramādhava, p, 535).—‘One should go forth the very day on
which he becomes freed from all attachments.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 947).—‘After he has lived in the forest
as a Hermit, the man, calm and advanced in age, should make up his mind
to go forth as a Renunciate. Having withdrawn the fires within himself,
free from all such feelings as fear, avarice, delusion, anger, sorrow,
envy, pride and jealousy, he should not wait for any time; as men’s
determinations are evanescent; hence he shall not wait for *to-morrow*,
*to-morrow*; that very day he shall renounce all activities and go forth
as a Renunciate.’

*Vāyupurāṇa* (Do., p. 949).—‘Leading the life of the Hermit, having his
sins burnt by austerities, the twice-born man shall take to renunciation
and enter the fourth stage. ì laving made offerings to Brāhmaṇas, gods
and his own Pitṛs and men, and having performed the *Vaiśvānarī* or the
*Prājāpatya* sacrifice, he shall deposit the fires within himself and
shall go forth, uttering the proper *mantras*: thenceforward he shall
renounce all affection and longing for sons and others.’

*Nṛsiṃhapurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 951).—‘The Brāhmaṇa, whose gestatory,
generative and digestive organs and the head are well-controlled, may go
forth as a Renunciate, even without having married, and live on alms.
Renunciation consists in the giving up of the affections, attachment to
objects of sense, son, wife, good and evil, as also the anxiety for
worldly affairs.’

*Dakṣa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 533).—‘If any one reverses the order of the
stages, he is the most sinful among men. If one having been a
Householder, becomes a Religious Student, he is neither a Renunciate nor
a Hermit; he is beyond the pale of all the stages.’

*Aṅgiras* (Do., p. 534).—‘Having found the world to be devoid of
essence, and longing for the essential substance, the man, being free
from all attachment, goes forth, without marrying. One may go forth
either directly after Studentship or after having led the life of the
Householder, or after having lived as a Hermit in the forest.’

*Yama* (Do., p. 536).—‘On the death of his wife, if he does not take to
another wife, he should go forth as a Renunciate; or this highest path
may be taken up by one who, having lived as a Hermit, has shaken off all
his sins.’

*Nārada* (Do, p. 537).—‘Even from the very first stage, if the Brāhmaṇa
becomes freed from all attachment for this ocean of worldliness, and
desires liberation, he should renounce relationships and go forth as a
Renunciate.’

*Yogi-Yājñavalkya* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 537).—‘There are four stages
prescribed by the Veda for the Brāhmaṇa, three for the Kṣatriya, two for
the Vaiśya and one for the Śūdra.’

*Vāmanapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘Pour stages have been spoken of for the Brāhmaṇa;
three only, *i.e*., those of the Householder, the Student, the Hermit,
for the Kṣatriva; only two—Householdership and Hermitship—for the
Vaiśya; only one, that of Householdership, is proper for the Śūdra.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.60).—‘Controlling his senses, renouncing all love and
hatred and fear of things, the *twice-born* man becomes immortal.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Aparārka, p. 966; Parāśaramādhava, p. 538).—‘Having paid
off the three debts, being freed from all notions of *I* and *mine*, the
Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya, may go forth from the house.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 538).—‘Having deposited the fires
within himself, the *twice-born* man should become a Renunciate.’
