+++
title = "038 प्राजापत्यन् निरुप्येष्टिम्"

+++
*Bodhāyana* (2.17.21).—‘A Brāhmaṇa who, knowing this, dies after fasting
during the night of Brahman, and depositing within himself the sacred
fires, conquers all guilts, even that of killing a Brāhmaṇa.’

*Viṣṇu* (96.1, 2).—‘After having passed through the first three stages,
and annihilated passion, he must offer an oblation to Prajāpati, in
which he bestows all his wealth as the sacrificial fee, and enter the
stage of the Renunciate. Having reposited the fires in his own mind, he
must enter the village in order to collect alms.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.56).—‘Either after Studentship, or after Hermitship,
having performed the *Prājāpatya* sacrifice, at which his entire wealth
is given away as the sacrificial fee, and at its completion, repositing
the fires within himself,—(he shall turn his mind towards liberation).’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 538).—‘Repositing the fires within
himself, the twice-born should go forth as a Renunciate, devoted to the
practice of *Yoga*. After having performed the *Prājāpatya* or the
*Āgneyī* sacrifice, and having all his impurities evaporated within
himself, he should have recourse to the stage dedicated to Brahman.’

*Nṛsiṃhapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 539).—‘Leading the life of the
Hermit, having his sins burnt by austerity, the twice-born person
should, in accordance with the law, take to renunciation and enter the
fourth stage. Having made offerings to gods, *Pitṛs*, sages and men, and
also to himself, and having performed the *Prājāpatya* or the
*Vaiśvānarī* sacrifice, he shall reposit the fire within himself and,
reciting mantras, go forth.’

*Kātyāyana* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 542).—‘Having reposited the fires
within himself, seated in the centre of the altar, and meditating upon
Hari, having obtained the permission of his *guru*, he should pronounce
the *Praiṣamantra*.’
