+++
title = "006 महान्त्य् अपि"

+++
**(verses 6-7)**

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (1.5.1).—‘First of all, one should examine the
family—on the father’s as also on the mother’s side, etc., etc.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.54).—‘\[The girl should be selected\] from a Śrotriya
family of which ten generations are well known, which is expansive and
which is not beset with the defect of an infectious disease.’

*Laghu-Śātātapa* (36).—‘One shall not marry a girl whose father is not
known.’

*Viṣṇu* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 587).—‘In connection with the
marriage of Brāhmaṇas, what should be heeded is the family.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 588).—‘The following are the fourteen
families in which one should not marry: (1) One should avoid such
Brāhmaṇa-families as have their *Pravaras* unknown, and also (2) the
family of hereditary (professional) priests; (3) a family of which the
members are too tall; (4) that of which the members are too short; (5)
that of which the members are of too pronounced a complexion; (6) the
family of which several members have a limb wanting; (7) that of which
several members have too many limbs; (8) that of which the members
suffer from dyspepsia; (9) that of which the members suffer from
leucoderma, or (10) leprosy and such other diseases; (11) that of which
the members are too lascivious; (12) that of which the members are given
up entirely to Tāntric practices; (13) the Family of which the members
suffer from epilepsy or (14) from paleness.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 589)—‘\[Such objectionable families
are to be avoided, because\] the offspring is of the same nature as the
family.’

*Hārīta* (Aparārka, p. 84).—‘The following families are to be avoided
even though they he not outcasts: In which there, has been lucoderma, or
leprosy, or dropsy or pthisis or other infectious deseases, in which
members have been shortlived or suffering from piles; of which the
*Gotra* and *Pravara Ṛṣiṣ* are not known, or that, in which the Veda is
unknown or one which has the same *Ṛṣis*. The first six are to ho
avoided because the offspring takes after the family; of the unknown
*Gotra-Pravara* is to he avoided because such a family would he unlit
for sacrificial performances; and one in which the Veda is unknown is to
be avoided, because it would he unfit, for divine rites; one having the
same *Ṛṣis* as the man himself is to he avoided because it is the same
family. For these reasons one should examine seven generations on the
father’s side and live on the mother’s side and then select as his wife
a girl who has not attained puberty, is endowed with superior qualities
and has a brother. He shall always select one who is fully qualified as
regards family, the asterism under which she has been born, and learning
and wisdom.’
