+++
title = "012 सवर्णाग्रे द्विजातीनाम्"

+++
**(verses 3.12-13)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (1. 8. 2-5)—‘For the Brāhmaṇa there are four wives, in the
order of the castes; for the Kṣatriya, there are three; for the Vaiśya,
two; for the Śūdra, one.’

*Viṣṇu* (21. 1-1).—\[Same as above.\]

*Viṣṇu* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 191).—‘For the twice-born, the Śūdra wife
can serve no spiritual purpose; the only purpose she can serve is that
of lust and hence she has been permitted only for one who is blinded by
lust.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 57).—‘In the order of ṭhe castes, there are three
wives for the Brāhmaṇa, two for the Kṣatriya and for tho Vaiśya; for the
Śūdra, there is only the wife of the same caste.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1. 24-25).—‘In the order of the castes, there are three
wives for the Brāhmaṇa, two for the Kṣatriya, one each for the Vaiśya
and the Śūdra;—according to some people, the Shíidra girl may also he
married, but without mantras.’

*Pāraśara* (1.4. 8-1.1).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, there are three wives, in
the order of the castes;—two for the Kṣatriya;—one for the Vaiśya;—for
all, the Śūdra wife also, hut without mantras.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 747,).—‘For all men the first
alternative is to have a wife of the same caste as oneself.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 748).—‘In the order of the castes,
the Brāhmaṇa may have four wives; the Kṣatriya, three; the Vaiśya, two;
the Śūdra, only one, the Śūdra.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 748).—‘In the event of his not
obtaining a girl of the same caste as himself, the Brāhmaṇa may beget, a
son on a Kṣatriya wife, or on a Vaiśya wife, or according to some, on a
Śūdra wife.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 748).—‘Apart from the Brāhmaṇa
wife, there are three wives, in the descending order of the castes; for
the Śūdra girl, there are (apart from the Śūdra husband), three husbands
in the ascending order of the castes; for the Kṣatriya there are two
wives, in addition to the one of his own caste; for the Vaiśya only one;
for the Vaiśya girl there are two husbands and for the Kṣatriya, one
only—in addition to that of her own caste.’
