+++
title = "020 चतुर्णाम् अपि"

+++
**(verses 3.20-21)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (1. 11. 1).—‘There are eight marriages.’

*Vasiṣṭha* (1.28-29).—‘There are six marriages,—Brāhma, Daiva, Ārṣa,
Gāndharva, Kṣātra, and Mānuśa.’

*Śaṅkha* (4. 2).—‘Brāhma, Daiva, Ārṣa, Prājāpatya, Āsura, Gāndharva,
Rākṣasa, and Paiśāca, the lowest is the eighth.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 846).—‘Eight forms of marriage have
been laid down as a sacrament for several castes: among these the Brāhma
is the first, then comes the Prājāpatya, the Ārṣa, the Daiva, the
Gāndharva, and the Āsura; then come the Rākṣasa and the Paiśāca; the
eighth is the lowest.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘There are eight marriages; Brāhma, Daiva, Gāndharva,
Āsura, Rākṣasa, Paiśāca, Mānuṣa and Kṣātra.’

*Arthaśāstra* (Part II, p. 12).—‘When the girl is adorned and given
away, it is the Brāhma form of marriage;—when the pair perform religious
rites together, it is the Prājāpatya; when a pair of cows is received in
exchange, it is the Ārṣa; when the girl is given away to the Priest
within the altar, it is the Daiva; that which is accomplished by mutual
consent is the Gāndharva; when the giver receives a fee, it is the
Āsura; when the girl is taken away by force, it is the Rākṣasa; when the
girl is taken away while asleep, it is the Paiśāca.’

*Nārada* (12. 38-53).—\[38-39 as in the above-mentioned quotation from
Vīramitrodaya; then\]—‘In the *Brāhma* form, a maiden decked with
ornaments is given to the bridegroom, after he has been invited and
honourably received by the father. When he has been received with the
words—“Carry on your sacred duties together with her,” it is called the
*Prājāpatya* form. When the father receives from the bridegroom, a
dress, a bull and a cow, it is called the *Ārṣa* form. When she is given
before the altar, to a priest officiating at a sacrifice, it is called
the *Daiva* form. The union of a willing maiden with her lover is the
fifth form called *Gāndharva*. When a price is asked for the bride by
her father and received by him, it is the form called *Āsura*. The
*Rākṣasa* form is declared to consist of the forcible abduction of a
maiden. Sexual intercourse with a woman during her sleep, or while she
is unconscious, constitutes the eighth form, the basest of all. Of
these, the first four, beginning with the *Brāhma*, are declared to be
lawful; the *Gāndharva* form is common to all castes; the three forms
that come after it are unlawful. Besides the lawful wives, seven other
kinds of wives are mentioned, who have been previously enjoyed by
another man. Among those, the *Punarbhū* is of three kinds and the
Svairiṇî of four kinds. A maiden, not actually deflowered, but only
joined in wedlock to a former husband by the hand, is the first kind of
*Punarbhū*. She is required to have the marriage-ceremony performed once
more, with her second husband. One who, after having left her husband,
and betaken herself to another man, returns to her husband, is called
the second kind of *Punarbhū*. When a woman, on the failure of
brothers-in-law, is delivered by her relations to a Sapiṇḍa of the same
caste, she is called the third *Punarbhū*. When a woman, with or without
children, goes to live with another man, through love, while her husband
is alive, she is called the first *Svairiṇī*. When the woman, after the
death of her husband, rejects her brother-in-law or other relations, and
unites herself with a stranger, through love, she is called the second
*Svairiṇī*. One who, having come from a foreign country, or having been
purchased with money, or being oppressed with hunger or thirst, gives
herself up to a man, saying “I am thine,” is called the third
*Svairiṇī*. When a woman, after having been given in marriage, by her
elders, in accordance with the custom of her country, becomes forcibly
united with another man, she is called the fourth *Svairiṇī*.’
