+++
title = "023 षड् आनुपूर्व्या"

+++
**(verses 3.23-24)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.10-14).—‘Of these, four are commended for the
Brāhmaṇa, of these the preceding being more commendable than the
succeeding; and of the remaining four, the succeeding is more
reprehensible than the preceding; of these again, the sixth and the
seventh are in keeping with the character of the *Kṣatriya*,—and the
fifth and the eighth for the Vaiśya and the Śūdra; because Vaiśyas and
Śūdras have no restrictions regarding their wives.’

*Śaṅkha* (4.3).—‘Among these the four mentioned first are lawful; the
Gāndharva and the Rākṣasa are commended for the Kṣatriya.’

*Gautama* (4.14, 15).—‘The first four are lawful; six, according to
some.’

*Viṣṇu* (24.27, 28).—‘Among these, the first four are lawful; the
Gāndharva also, for Kṣatriyas.’

*Āpastamba* (2. 12. 3).—‘Of these, the first three are commended, the
preceding being more commendable than the succeeding.’

*Mahābhārata* (Ādi-parva, 73, 12).—‘The Gāndharva and the Rākṣasa are
lawful for the Kṣatriya.’

*Mahābhārata* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 859).—‘O Yudhiṣṭhira, for the
good Brāhmaṇas, the Brāhma form is the lawful one.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 859).—‘The first four are commended
for the Brāhmaṇa; the Gāndharva and the Rāksasa for the Kṣatriya, the
Āsura for the Vaiśya, and the Śūdra; the last one has been condemned.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 860).—‘The first four forms of
marriage are lawful, and conducive to water-libations; being free from
fees and fit for Brāhmaṇas, they save both families.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 487).—‘The first four are commended
for the Brāhmaṇa; the Gāndharva and the Rākṣasa for the Kṣatriya, the
Āsura for the Vaiśya and for the Śūdra; the eighth one is entirely
condemned.’

*Saṃvarta* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 487).—‘If a good girl be unobtainable by
any means, than she may be married even by theft, while she may be
alone.’

*Arthaśāstra* (Part 11, p. 13).—‘Of these the first four are righteous,
as authorised by the Father; the remaining (which are unrighteous) may
be authorised by the Father and the Mother (who accept the fees).’
