+++
title = "027 आच्छाद्य चाऽर्चयित्वा"

+++
*Gautama* (4. 6).—‘One should give away his daughter, dressed and
adorned, to a man who is endowed with learning, character, good conduct,
and relations;—this is the Brāhma form.’

*Baudhāyana* (1. 11. 2).—‘The Brāhma form consists in giving the girl to
a man who has kept the vows of the Religious Student seeking for wife,
after having tested his learning and character.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2. 11. 17).—‘In the Brāhma form of marriage,
one should find out all about the relations, the character, the learning
and the health of the man and then give to him the girl after having
adorned her to the best of his power, for the purpose of hearing
children and for companionship.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.30).—‘That is the form of marriage in which the father
gives away the girl to a person desirous of having a wife, after having
made to him an offering of water.’

*Viṣṇu* (24.19).—‘The Brāhma form consists in inviting the qualified man
and giving the girl to him.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 58).—‘When the girl, adorned to the best of one’s
power, is given to a man who has been invited for the purpose, it
constitutes the Brāhma form of marriage; the son born of these marriages
purities twenty-one generations on both sides.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (1. 6. 15).—‘Having adorned the girl one should
give her away, preceded by the water-offering; the son born thereof
purifies twelve future generations and twelve past generations on both
sides.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 847).—‘One should give away the
girl, endowed with auspicious qualities, dressed and adorned, wearing
now bangles, to a deserving man; this constitutes the Brāhma form of
marriage.’

*Saṃvarta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 847).—‘One should give away—by
the Brāhma form of marriage—his daughter, endowed with good qualities,
after having adorned her with excellent ornaments, to a suitable
bridegroom.’

*Vyāsa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 847).—‘One should give away the
girl, dressed and adorned, after going round the fire thrice and
pronounced the name and *gotra*; this is the Brāhma form.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 848).—‘The girl that is given away
with water, they regard as *Brahmadeyā*.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 848).—‘When one offers a pair of
clothes to a man and gives his girl to him, without deprecating or
discussing him, directing him to jointly carry on Dharma, this is the
Brāhma form of marriage.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 848).—‘When one gives to a
man of his own caste, who is well known to him, the girl who has not
reached puberty,—this is the Brāhma marriage.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 848).—‘One should give away the
girl adorned with gold, before she has reached puberty.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 848).—‘To a qualified
bridegroom, you give the girl, with proper faith and confidence, after
having adorned her to the best of your power and endowed her with
wealth.’
