+++
title = "045 ऋतुकालाभिगामी स्यात्"

+++
**(verses 3.45-50)  
**

*Gautama* (5.1-2).—‘He shall approach her during the season; or on all
days except those that have been prohibited.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.1.15, 18).—‘By approaching his wife during
the seasons, one maintains one’s vows; even during the intervening days,
ho should approach only his wife.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (12.18).—‘He should have intercourse only with his wife,
during her seasons, except the forbidden days.’

*Viṣṇu* (69.1).—‘He shall not approach his wife on the eighth,
fourteenth and fifteenth days of the fortnight.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.79-81).—‘Sixteen are the *nights of season* for women;
during this season, he shall lie with her on the even nights, avoiding
the first four nights; acting thus, he would be as good as a Religious
Student. In approaching his wife, he shall avoid the asterisms of Maghā
and Mūla. Or, he may approach her according to his desire, always
bearing in mind what is good for women; he should ever remain devoted to
his own wife.’

*Pāraskara Gṛhyasūtra* (1.11.7-8).—‘Having married her, he should go to
her during her seasons; or whenever they desire.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 559).—‘After she has bathed on the
fourth day, he shall approach her on the even nights.’

*Ātharvaṇa Śruti* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 497).—‘Those who have recourse to
sexual intercourse during the day, pour out their life-breath; if one
has intercourse during the night, it is as good as celibacy.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 497).—‘Even during the period, one
shall not have intercourse during the day.’

*Devala* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 498).—‘If a man, when healthy, does not
approach his wife during the period, he incurs the sin of killing the
embryo.’

*Baudhāyana* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 498).—‘If a man approaches not his
wife during the period, for three years, he incurs the sin of killing
the embryo. He who approaches not his wife during the period, and who
approaches her apart from the period, the sin of both is equal, as also
that of the man who throws out his semen unnaturally.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 499).—‘Excess of woman’s seed makes the
progeny female, excess of man’s seed makes the progeny male; therefore
for increasing his seed, the man shall eat oily and delicious food.’
