+++
title = "080 ऋषयः पितरो"

+++
*Gautama* (5.3,4,9).—‘He should be the worshipper of Gods, Pitṛs, Men,
Sages and Elementals; he should study the Veda every day; sacrifice to
Gods, sacrifice to Pitṛs, and sacrifice, to Men; and also Vedic Study.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.6. 1-6).—‘These are the Five Great Sacrifices, these
also are the Great Sacrificial Sessions: Sacrifice to Gods, Sacrifice to
Pitṛs, Sacrifice to Elementals, Sacrifice to Men, Sacrifice to the Veda;
day after day, he shall offer Svāhā, ending with the supplying of
fuel,—in this manner does he accomplish the sacrifice to gods; day after
day, he shall offer Svadhā, ending with the water-offering,—in this
manner he accomplishes the sacrifice to Pitṛs; day after day, he shall
how down to the Elementals, ending with the offering of flowers,—in this
manner he accomplishes the Sacrifice to the Elements; day after day, he
shall offer food to Brāhmaṇas, ending with the offering of roots, fruits
and vegetables,—in this manner he accomplishes the Sacrifice of Men; day
after day he shall carry on Vedic Study, ending with the Praṇava,—in
this manner he accomplishes the sacrifice to the Veda.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 388).—‘He shall honour the Gods, the
Pitṛs and the Sages, respectively with the Kavya, the Kavya and the
Svādhyāya; *Havya* standing for what is offered into the Fire, with
*Svāhā*, which appeases the Gods,—*Svadhā* being what is offered to the
Pitṛs, which pleases the Pitṛs,—*Svādhyāya* being the reading that
starts with *om*, which sacrifices to the sages.’

*Viṣṇu* (59.20-25).—‘For the expiation of the sins, he shall perform the
Sacrifices to the Veda, the Gods, the Pitṛs, the Elementals and the Men;
Vedic Study constitutes the *Sacrifice to the Veda*;—Homa is the
*Sacrifice to the Gods*;—Water-libations to forefathers is the
*Sacrifice to the Pitṛs*;—the making of Bali-offerings constitute the
*Sacrifice to the Elementals*;—the honouring of guests constitutes the
*Sacrifice to Men*.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.102).—‘Bali, Svadhā, Homa, Svādhyāya and Atithī-satkāra
are the great sacrifices to Elementals, Pitṛs, Gods, Veda and Men.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (3.1-2).—‘Now follow the Five Great
Sacrifices:—Sacrifice to Gods, Sacrifice to Elementals, Sacrifice to
Veda, Sacrifice to Pitṛs and Sacrifice to Men; the offerings made into
the Fire constitute the *Sacrifice to Gods*, the *bali-offerings*
constitute the *Sacrifice to Elementals*; the offerings made to Pitṛs
constitutes the *Sacrifice to Pitṛs*; the studying of the Veda
constitutes the *Sacrifice to Veda*; the offerings to Men constitute the
*Sacrifice to Men*.’

*Chandogapariśiṣṭa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 390).—‘The *Great
Sacrifices* should be understood to be those sacrifices that are offered
to Gods, Elementals, Pitṛs, Vedas and Men, in due order; the teaching of
Veda is the *Sacrifice to Vedas*, the water-offerings to forefathers is
the *Sacrifice to Pitṛs*, the offering of Homa is the *Sacrifice to
Gods*, the offering of *Bali* is the Sacrifice to Elementals, the
honouring of Guests is the *Sacrifice to Men*; or the *Sacrifice to
Pitṛs* may consist of *Śrāddha* or of offerings made to forefathers.’

*Śātātapa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 391).—‘He shall perform, in due
order, the Sacrifice to Elementals, the daily Śrāddha and the honouring
of guests, as also Vedic Study.’

*Jābāla* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 393).—‘Of the Great Sacrifices, the
first is accomplished by the water-libation; the Sacrifice to Gods is
accomplished by making offerings into Fire with the Sāvitrī-mantra, and
the Sacrifice to Elementals, by the Bali-offering; the Sacrifice to
Veda, by repeating Vedic texts; and the Sacrifice to Men, by the
honouring of guests.’
