+++
title = "084 वैश्वदेवस्य सिद्धस्य"

+++
**(verses 3.84-93)  
**

*Āpastamba- Dharmasūtra* (2.3.12).—‘For the householder, the oblations
of food and the Bali-offerings are conducive to Heaven and to
prosperity.’

*Viṣṇu Smṛti* (67.4).—‘Then with the remnant of the food, he shall make
the Bali-offerings; over the east, to Agni..... on the pillar to Śrī, to
Hiraṇyakeśī and to the Trees; at the door-way, to Dharma and Adharma and
to Death; to Varuṇa, near the water-pot; to Viṣṇu, on the mortar; to the
Maruts, on the stone-slab; at the adjoining room, to King Vaiśravaṇa and
to the elementals; over the eastern half, to Indra and to Indrapuruṣas;
over the southern half, to Yama and to Yamapuruṣas; over the western
half, to Varuṇa and to Varuṇapuruṣas; over the northern half, to Soma
and to Somapuruṣas; over the centre, to Brahman and to Brahmapuruṣas;
upwards, to Ākāśa; over the altar, to the diurnal elementals; and in the
evening, to the nocturnal elementals. For crows, dogs and Caṇḍālas, the
food shall he offered on the ground.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (1.2.1, 2).—‘Morning and evening, he shall offer
oblations of cooked food; to the deities of the Agnihotra, to Soma, to
Vanaspati, to Agni-Soma, to Indra-Agni, to Dyauḥ-Pṛthivī, to
Dhanvantari, to Indra, to Viśvedevas, and to Brahman.’

*Pāraskara* (2.9.1.12).—‘Out of the food dedicated to the Viśvedevas, he
shall offer oblations with *svāhā* to Brahman, to Prajāpati, to the
Gṛhyās, to Kaśyapa, to Anumati, to Bhūtagṛhas, to Parjanya, to Apas, to
Pṛthivī to Dhātṛ, to Vidhātṛ; to Vāyu and to the Quarters, towards each
quarter; three oblations in the centre to Brahman, to Antarikṣa and to
Sūrya; to the north of these, to all-gods and all-elementals; to Uṣas
and to the Lord of the elementals; on the South, to the Pitṛs; and at
the end he should offer to the Brāhmaṇas; and it should he distributed
in the right proportion, among beggars and guests.’

*Gautama* (5.11-16).—‘Homa-oblations should he offered into the fire, to
Agni, to Dhanvantari, to Viśvedevas, to Prajāpati and to Sviṣṭakṛt; to
the presiding deity of each of the quarters, towards each quarter; on
the doorway, to the Maruts; entering the room, to the household deities:
over the centre, to Brahman; on the water-jar, to Apas; in the sky, to
Ākāśa; in the evening, to the night-walkers.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.3.17-23; and 2.4.1-8).—‘In the making of the
Bali-offerings, each spot should he swept and washed with water; and on
each one of these spots food should he served;...... at the bedstead
with the Kāma-mantra; at the door-step, with the
Antarikṣa-mantra;......... towards the south, with the Pitṛ-mantra;
towards the north, to Rudra; the last one in the evening towards the
sky.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.9.5.6).—‘he shall make all beings—down to
dogs and Caṇḍālas—partakers in the Vaiśvadeva offering; but according to
some, it shall not be offered to the undeserving.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.4).—‘Having offered his share to the learned guest, or to
the religious student, he shall make the offering to the Pitṛs.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (1.2.3-10).—‘Next the Bali-offerings; to the
gods, to Apas, to the Herbs, to Trees, to the Household, to the
Household Deities, and to the Vāstudevas; to Indra and to Indrapuruṣas,
to Yama and to Yamapuruṣas, to Varuṇa and to Varuṇapuruṣas, to Soma and
to Somapuruṣas,—these towards each of the quarters; in the centre, to
Brahman and to Brahmapuruṣas; to the Viśvedevas; during the day, to all
the day-walkers; and in the evening, to the night-walkers and towards
the north, to the Rakṣas.’

*Gobhila* (1.4.8-12).—‘The first offering that he makes is the offering
to Pṛthivī; the second is the offering to Vāyu, the third is the
offering to the Viśvedevas, and the fourth is the offering to Prajāpati.
Then follow the other Bali-offerings; the first to the water-deity, made
on the water-jar, the centre and the door-way; the second to Herbs and
Trees; and the third to Ākāśa. Then comes another offering: over the
bedstead, either to Kāma or to Manyu; then to the Rakṣojanas. The
remnant of all these offerings is deposited towards the South, and it
goes to the Pitṛs.’

*Yajñavalkya* (1.103).—‘Out of the food left after the offerings to
gods, ho shall make the offering to elementals; and he shall deposit
food on the ground, for dogs, Caṇḍālas and crows.’

*Kurma-purāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 312).—‘For dogs, Caṇḍālas and
outcasts, as also for birds, one shall offer food outside, on the
ground.’
