+++
title = "088 मरुद्भ्य इति"

+++
*Dakṣa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 456).—‘Because gods, men and animals
are supported by the householder, therefore is the householder the best
of all. The householder has been described as the source of the other
three stages; whenever he suffers, the other three suffer with
him;...... for this reason, the householder is to be guarded with due
effort, and should be honoured and worshipped by the king, as also by
the other three.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do., p. 457).—‘In as much as it is from the householder
that proceed the birth, growth and maintenance of all the
life-stages,—he has been declared to be superior.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (8.14.16).—‘It is the householder alone who offers
sacrifices; it is he alone who performs austerities; among all the
life-stages, that of the householder is the best; just as all rivers and
rivulets find their final rest in the ocean, so do persons in the
various stages of life find their haven in the householder; just as all
living beings keep alive under the protection of their mother, so do
they also live under the protection of the householder.’

*Viṣṇu* (59.27.29).—‘The religious student, the renunciate and the
recluse, all these derive their living from the householders......... It
is the householder alone who performs sacrifices; he alone performs
austerities; he alone makes gifts; hence is the householder the highest
of all. Sages, Pitṛs and Gods (,?) Elementals and Guests have
expectations from householders; hence alone is the householder the
highest of all.’

*Gautama* (3.1).—‘Of these, the householder is the source; the others
being unproductive.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.6.29).—‘The teachers have held to a single life-stage;
the others being unproductive.’
