+++
title = "093 एवं यः"

+++
*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (95.65.66).—‘May some such person be born in our family,
as would make to us offerings of water out of deep rivers, specially
those whose water is cool! May some excellent man be horn in our family
who, with mind composed, would offer Śrāddha to us at Gayā, under the
banyan tree!’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.104).—‘Daily should food and water he offered to Pitṛs
and Men; one should constantly carry on Vedic study; he shall not cook
food for himself alone.’

*Mahābhārata* (13.97.8).—(Reproduces Manu 82.)

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.2.4).—‘Or he may feed a single Brāhmaṇa fully learned in
the Veda, endowed with learning and character, and free from all evil
characteristics.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 430).—‘Having made the offering to
the Vedic Scholar, and to the Religious Student, he shall make it to the
Pitṛs, and then feed the guests.’

*Chandogapariśiṣṭa* (Do., p. 431)—‘For the fulfilment of the offering to
the Pitṛs, he may feed at least one Brāhmaṇa;...... if there is no one
present to he fed, or if there is not sufficient food left, he shall
take up as much food as there may be and offer it daily to Pitṛs and
Men.’

*Ādi-purāṇa* (Do.).—‘In honour of all the six Pitṛs, he may feed at
least one Brāhmaṇa every day.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya-purāṇa* (Do., p. 432).—‘Every day, one shall offer śrāddha,
either with food or with water; and in honour of the Pitṛs, he shall
feed several Brāhmaṇas, or a single one.’

*Yogi-Yājñavalkya* (Do.).—‘Every day one shall offer śrāddha to the
Pitṛs, either with food or with water.’

*Vyāsa* (Do., p. 433).—‘At the daily śrāddha, the Viśvedevas are to be
omitted.’

*Bhaviṣya-purāṇa* (Do.).—‘At the daily śrāddha, there is to he no
offering to the gods.’

*Puraṇa* (Do.).—‘That which is called the daily śrāddha is observed as
being devoid of the offering to the gods; it is offered to only six
ancestors, and there is to be no offering of balls or the sacrificial
fee.’

*Laghu-Hārīta* (Aparārka, p. 145).—‘At the daily śrāddha, there is to he
no offering to the gods, also no water-offering or hall-offering.’

*Matsya-purāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 115).—‘The daily śrāddha I am going to
describe as without the water-offering or the invocation, and also
without the offering to gods.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparāka, p. 145).—‘For the accomplishment of the Pitṛyajña,
one shall feed at least one Brāhmaṇa, without making any offering to the
gods. If there is no Brāhmaṇa available, a small quantity of food should
be taken out and offered to Pitṛs and Men.’

*Pracetas* (Aparārka, p. 140).—‘The daily offering is not to be made
into fire; there is to he no invocation, nor dismissal.’

*Nārāyaṇa* (Aparārka, p. 146).—‘Having invited one or several śrotriyas,
making them sit facing the east......... he shall offer him water and
seat; and also water for washing, after he has eaten the food offered to
him to the best of one’s capacity.’
