+++
title = "094 कृत्वैतद् बलिकर्मैवम्"

+++
*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.3-5).—‘One shall make Bali-offerings to the Household
deities; hiving offered a share to the Vedic scholar or to toe religious
student, who may have arrived, he shall make the offering to the Pitṛs;
then he shall feed the guests, in order of seniority; and then the
members of his own household.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.108).—‘Alms should be given, with due honour, to the
recluse firm in his vow; and he shall feed only friends and relations as
might arrive at the time.’

*Viṣṇu* (59.14).—‘Alms shall be given to the recluse.’

*Pāraskara* (2.9.12).—‘Food shall be distributed among the recluses and
the guests, in due order.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.5.14).—‘The Praṇava, the Vyāhṛtis and the Sāvitrī
constitute the five Great Sacrifices, which purify the Brāhmaṇa day
after day; purified by these five Sacrifices, he makes offerings to the
gods.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.6.5).—‘Day after day he shall offer to Brāhmaṇas food
containing also roots, fruits and vegetables; thereby he accomplishes
the Sacrifice to human beings.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.7.19).—‘First of all he shall feed the guests, then such
ladies of the house as may he carrying; and then, with special care, the
children, the old persons and those that may be ill.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.4.11).—‘He shall feed the guests first of
all.’

*Viṣṇu-purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika. pp. 429-430).—‘After having made
the Bali-offerings be shall stay in the court-yard, expecting guests,
till the cows are milked; when a guest has arrived, he shall welcome him
with due honour, regarding him as Hiraṇyagarbha; at least one other
Brāhmaṇa the Householder shall feed in honour of his father.’

*Parāśara* (Do.).—‘He shall not ask the guest either his *gotra* or his
Vedic Rescension or the extent of his Vedic study.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.).—‘If a *Bhikṣuka*, seeker for alms, comes before the
offerings have been made to the Viśvedevas, the Householder shall keep
aside food enough for these offerings, and give the food to the seeker
for alms. The Religious Student, the Renunciate, the Student seeking for
knowledge, one who is supporting his preceptor, the way-farer and one
who is suffering from want of livelihood,—these are to be regarded as
*Bhikṣuka*, seeker for Alms.’
