+++
title = "097 नश्यन्ति हव्य-कव्यानि"

+++
**(verses 3.97-98)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.9-11).—‘The *Havya* and offerings are to be offered to the
Vedic scholar only; what is offered to the non-learned reaches neither
the Pitṛs nor the gods; gifts should be offered to one who is extremely
learned; there is nothing Wrong in ignoring the uneducated. In the
presence of flaming fire, one should not pour libations on ashes.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.201, 202).—‘Cows, sesamum and gold should be given,
with due respects, to a qualified person; never should the wise man
desiring his own welfare make a gift to the unqualified. In fact, a man
devoid of learning and austerities should not accept any gift; if he
does accept them, he drags downwards both himself and the giver.’

*Vyāsa* (4.39,42,50,52,54,57).—‘If a man ignores the Brāhmaṇa student
near him, when offering food and gifts, he damages his merit extending
over three generations. Gift made to a non-Brāhmaṇa remains the same;
that made to the Brāhmaṇa becomes two-fold; that made to the Preceptor
becomes thousand-fold, and that made to the person learned in the Veda
becomes endless. The Brāhmaṇa’s mouth is the soil, fertile and free from
thorns; therein should one sow the seeds; such cultivation fulfils all
desires. When there comes to one’s house a Brāhmaṇa endowed with
learning and humility, all the herbs become delighted at the prospect of
(being eaten by him and thereby) reaching the highest state. One should
feed a mouth equipped with Veda, even though that person may have
already taken his food, rather than the illiterate person that may have
been fasting for six days. When the person learned in the Veda and
attentive to his duties takes his food, he brings to the giver rewards
endless and extending over many lives.’

*Āśvalāyana* (1.150).—‘If the good man offers food into the mouth of the
man learned in the Veda, he becomes freed from heinous sins, and attains
union with Brahman.’
