+++
title = "102 एकरात्रन् तु"

+++
**(verses 3.102-103)**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (8.7,8).—\[Reproduces Manu.\]

*Viṣṇu* (67.34, 35).—\[Do.\]

*Gautama* (5.41).—‘The guest, *Atithi*, is one who is not an inhabitant
of the same village, who arrives at the time when the sun is just
sinking below the tree-tops, and who stays for one night only.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 438).—‘That high-souled man who has
renounced all observances relating to particular dates of the month, to
special days of worship and to special festivals, is the *Atithi*,
guest, for all beings; others are only *Abhyāgatas*, arrivals.’

*Markaṇḍeya* (Do.).—‘Neither a friend, nor an inhabitant of the same
village, should he treated as a *guest*; that Brāhmaṇa is called a
*guest*, whose name and family are not known to the householder, who
arrives by chance at the time, hungry, fatigued, without any belongings,
seeking for food.’

*Mahābhārata* (Āśvamedhika, Do.).—‘To one who is suffering from hunger
and thirst, who has arrived at the right time and the right place, he
shall offer food after having welcomed him with due respect. Him should
he regard as a guest who has come from a distance, at the time of the
Vaiśvadeva offering.’

*Parāśara* (Ācāra, 9.41, 42).—‘One who has come from a distance, is
fatigued and has arrived at the time of the Vaiśvadeva offering,—shall
be regarded as a *guest*, not one who has come previously. One should
never receive a co-villager as a guest; because a guest, *Atithi*, is so
called because he does not come always.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.6.5).—‘To one who is a householder, firm in
his duties, if some one comes without any purpose, he is a guest whose
reception is a sacred duty.’

*Vyāsa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 351).—‘That man is honoured as a guest who
has come to one’s house from a distance, suffering from hunger, thirst
and fatigue.’

*Pracetas* (Do.).—‘One who arrives in the evening, or at the end of the
Vaiśvadeva offering, is to be honoured like a god; brought up by the
sun, he is called the *guest*.’

*Viṣṇu-purāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 352).—‘One shall honour as guest
that person who comes to one’s house, whose family or name is not
known,—who is not an inhabitant of the same village; he should be one
who is not related to the householder; he should be one who has nothing
with him, and has come from another country.’
