+++
title = "107 आसनावसथौ शय्याम्"

+++
*Yājñavalkya* (1. 107).—‘The guest shall not be deprived of sweet words,
place, straws and water.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.113).—After the Śrotriya guest has become satisfied,
one should follow him up to the boundary.’

*Gautama* (5.39,40).—‘Bedding, seat, lodging, following and attendance,
in the same manner as in the case of elders;—in the case of inferior
persons, all this has to be done even to a small extent.’

*Baudhāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 452).—‘Both morning and evening,
whatever food there may be, with that he shall make the Vaiśvadeva
offerings and then entertain, to the best of his capacity, such
Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya, Vaiśya and Śūdra guests as may happen to arrive; in
the event of his being unable to entertain several guests, he may offer
the food to only one of them, either to one who may be the best
qualified among them, or to him who may have been the first to arrive.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do.).—‘A non-Brāhmaṇa is not to be treated as the
guest of a Brāhmaṇa; it is only the learned and highly qualified
Brāhmaṇa that deserves the honours of a *guest*; the Kṣatriya and the
Vaiśya are to be received as friends; and the Śūdra is to be entertained
only out of kindness and sympathy.’

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 157).—‘One shall sit with him, at night he shall
retire to sleep on being permitted by him, rise before him, and follow
him when he leaves, turning back only when he asks him to do so.’

*Parāśara* (1.43-44).—‘When a guest arrives, one shall receive him with
warm welcome and honour him with the offering of water and seat and also
with washing of feet, shall offer food with respect and sweet-worded
enquiries, and shall follow him when he leaves; by these he shall win
his good will.’
