+++
title = "122 पितृयज्ञन् तु"

+++
*Sumantu* (Aparārka, p. 418).—‘The man with the fire shall offer Śrāddha
to those to whom his father offers it.’

*Maitrāyaṇīya-pariśiṣṭa* (Do.).—‘Marriage, the birth of a son, the
Pitrya Iṣṭi, Soma-sacrifice, sacred places, and the arrival of the right
Brāhmaṇa,—these are occasions for the performance of Śrāddha by one
whose father is living.’

*Viṣṇu* (Do.).—‘If the man with his father living performs Śrāddha, he
should offer it to those to whom his father offers it; if his
grandfather is alive, to those to whom the grandfather offers it; if his
father, grandfather and greatgrandfather are all alive, he shall not
offer it at all.’

*Gautama* (15.2).—‘During the later fortnight, from the fifth day
onwards, Śrāddha shall be performed.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 217).—‘The Moonless day, the Aṣṭakās, the Auspicious
ceremonies, the darker fortnight, the two solstices...... (these are the
occasions for Śrāddha).’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 417).—‘The Moonless day on which the moon sets
after appearing is called *Sinīvālī*; on that day should Śrāddha be
offered by Agnihotrins; and that day on which the moon is entirely
invisible (called *Kuhū*), on that it should be offered by Brāhmaṇas
without fire and by others.’

*Laugākṣi* (Do., p. 418).—‘The man whose father is dead should offer
Śrāddha every day, also every month on the moonless day, on auspicious
occasions and also every year.’

*Uśanas* (Aparārka, p. 418).—‘The twice-born man whose father has died
shall offer Śrāddha every day—be he with Fire or without Fire; also
every month and every year.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘While one’s father is living, one should avoid all
Śrāddhas; but according to some people, he should offer it to those
Pitṛs to whom his father offers it.’
