+++
title = "125 द्वौ दैवे"

+++
*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.24).—\[Reproduces Manu.\]

*Gautama* (15.8, 21).—‘At least nine; or an odd number; or any number,
in accordance with his zeal; (the man invited) should be possessed of
excellent qualities.’

*Viṣṇu* (73, 3-4).—‘In connection with the offering to the gods one
should feed two men, who should be facing the east; and in connection
with the offering to Pitṛs, three men, who should he facing the north;
or one in connection with each of the two offerings.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.227-229).—‘At the offering to gods, an even number, and
at that to Pitṛs, an odd number of Brāhmaṇas should be invited, to the
best of one’s capacity. Two men facing the east, in connection with the
offering to the gods; three facing the north, in connection with the
offering to Pitṛs; or one in connection with each of the two offerings;
so also in the case of the offering to the maternal grand-fathers.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (4.2).—‘Brāhmaṇas endowed with learning and
character and good conduct, invited in time, bathed and purified, should
be made to face the north, as if they were Pitṛs, either one or two or
three for each one of the Pitṛs; but never only one for all.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.9.21).—\[The same as Manu.\]

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 698).—‘One shall invite seven or five
or two Brāhmaṇas learned in the Veda.’

*Śaunaka* (Do.).—‘Two for each Pitṛ; one for each; or three for each.’

*Brahmāṇḍa-purāṇa* (Do., p. 699).—‘Even though he has the capacity, he
should feed less than nine, never more; so say those who perceive
difficulties in feeding a large number,’

*Vṛddha-Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘At the rite in honour of Pitṛs and gods, one
shall feed one or two or three on behalf of each; due honour and
observance of right time and place cannot be fulfilled if there is an
excess.’

*Śaṅkha* (Do.).—‘Or one may feed a single Brāhmaṇa, who is the
*sanctifier of company*.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 461).—‘Or, one may feed a single Brāhmaṇa,
thoroughly versed in the Veda.’
