+++
title = "129 एकैकम् अपि"

+++
**(verses 3.119-120)  
**

*Gautama* (5.28-30).—‘The Priest, the Teacher, the Father-in-law, the
paternal uncle and the maternal uncle,—when these arrive the
Honey-mixture is to be offered; again on the lapse of a year; and also
before the marriage and the sacrifice.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.8.5-9).—‘The Vedic Scholar deserves the cow
and the honey-mixture; as also the Teacher, the Priest, the Accomplished
Student, and the King, if he be righteous; to the Teacher, the Priest,
the Father-in-law and the King, the cow and the Honey-mixture shall be
offered when they come after the lapse of one year; the Honey-mixture
consists of curd mixed with honey, or water mixed with honey, or, in the
absence of other things, water only.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11.1).—‘Six persons deserve to be honoured: the Priest, the
bridegroom, the king, the paternal uncle, the Accomplished Student and
the maternal uncle.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.109-110).—‘One shall offer either a big bull or a big
goat to the Vedic scholar, as also honour, attendance, delicious food
and sweet words; once every year are to be entertained the Accomplished
Student, the Teacher, the King; as also the friend and the bridegroom,
and the Priests when going to officiate at a sacrifice.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra* (1.24.1-4).—‘After having appointed the Priest,
he shall offer to him the Honey-mixture; also to an Accomplished Student
that may happen to arrive; also to the King, the Teacher, the
Father-in-law, the paternal uncle and the maternal uncle.’

*Pāraskara* (1.3. 1-3).—‘Six persons deserve to be honoured: the
Teacher, the Bridegroom, the King, the dear friend, and the Accomplished
Student; these shall be entertained once every year; also the Priests
that are going to officiate at a sacrifice.’

*Gobhila* (4.10.23-26).—‘Six persons are deserving of the honour of
entertainment: the Teacher, the Priest, the Accomplished Student, the
Bridegroom, the dear friend and the guest; these should be entertained
after the lapse of one year; and also at marriage and at a sacrifice.’
