+++
title = "184 अग्र्याः सर्वेषु"

+++
**(verses 3.184-186)  
**

*Mahābhārata* (13.90, 26, 27, 37).—‘The Triṇāciketa, the tender of the
five fires, the Trisuparṇa, the man versed in the six subsidiary
sciences, the man born of the Brāhma form of marriage, the Chandoga, the
singer of the Jyeṣṭha-Sāma; those foremost in all the Vedas and in all
the expositions.’

*Gautama* (15.9, 28).—‘Vedic scholars, endowed with beauty, age and
character; the knower of the six subsidiary sciences, the singer of the
*Jyeṣṭha-sāma*, the *Triṇāciketa*, the *Trimadhu*, the *Trisuparṇa*, the
tender of the five fires, the Accomplished Student, one versed in
Mantras and Brāhmaṇas, one who is conversant with Dharma, one born of
the Brāhma form of marriage:—these are the *sanctifiers of company*.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2, 17, 22).—‘The *Trimadhu*, the *Trisuparṇa*,
the *Triṇāciketa*, the *Chaturmadhu*, the tender of the five fires, the
singer of the *Jyeṣṭha-sāma*, the reader of the Veda, the son of a Vedic
expounder, the Vedic scholar;—these are the *sanctifiers of company*.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.3.2, 5, 11).—‘The *Triṇāciketa*, the singer of the
*Jyeṣṭha-sāma*, the son born of the Brāhma form of marriage, the
*Trisuparṇa*; one who has read through the Veda, one purified by
austerities; specially the Yogins.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1, 219.221).—‘Those foremost in all the Vedas, the Vedic
Scholar, the youthful Knower of Brahman, one who knows the meaning of
the Veda, the singer of the *Jyeṣṭhasāman*, the *Trimadhu*, the
*Trīṣuparṇa*; those firm in their duties, those firm in austerities, the
tender of the five fires, Religious Students, those devoted to their
father and mother; such Brāhmaṇas constitute the glory of the Śrāddha.’

*Baudhāyana* (2, 8).—‘The *Trimadhu*, the *Triṇāciketa*, the
*Trisuparṇa*, the tender of the five fires, one who knows the six
subsidiary sciences, the *Śīrṣaka*, one who sings the *Jyeṣṭhasāman*,
the Accomplished Student; these are the *sanctifiers of company*.’

*Bṛhad-Yama* (3, 43).—‘One conversant with the Vedanta, one who sings
the *Jyeṣṭhasāman*, one who is free from avarice, one who is devoted to
the Veda;—such a Brāhmaṇa should be employed at the rites in honour of
Gods and Pitṛs.’
