+++
title = "187 पूर्वेद्युर् अपरेद्युर्"

+++
*Baudhāyana* (2.8, 6).—‘Either on the previous day, or early in the
morning on the same day, he shall invite persons, whose number shall not
be an even one and which shall be at least three, who are well-versed
expounders of the Veda, who are not related to him either by birth or
*gotra* or *mantra*, who are pure and equipped with *mantras*; and shall
seat them on seats prepared of kuśa grass, facing either the east or the
north.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2, 17, 11-15).—‘The invitation shall be on the
previous day;—on the next day, the second one;—and the third is the
request;—some people teach that the Śrāddha should consist of about
three as the first, so the second and the third.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11, 14).—‘During the dark fortnight, after the fourth day,
he shall make an offering to the Pitṛs: having got them together on the
previous day, either Brāhmaṇas or renunciates or hermits,—such as are
advanced in age, have not deviated from their duties, are learned in the
Veda, are not the invitor’s own disciples or pupils; but he may feed
even his disciples, if they are possessed of special qualifications.’

*Viṣṇu* (73.1).—‘Going to perform the Śrāddha, he shall, on the previous
day, invite the Brāhmaṇas.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1, 225).—‘The man, himself pure and self-controlled,
shall, on the previous day, invite the Brāhmaṇas.’

*Hārīta* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 696).—‘Going to perform the Śrāddha the
next day, he should invite the Brāhmaṇas on the previous day.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 696).—‘He shall approach the Brāhmaṇa
saying—*I shall perform Śrāddha to-morrow*—on the previous day; if that
be not possible, then on the same day.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘Having made up his mind that he shall perform Śrāddha
on the coming day, he shall invite the Brāhmaṇas;... if that be not
possible, then the next day.’

*Varāhapurāṇa* (Do., p. 697).—‘Knowing that he would be performing
Śrāddha on the next day, he shall clean the ground and invite the
Brāhmaṇas.’

*Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘On the previous day, at night, he shall
approach the Brāhmaṇas after they have taken their evening meal and
invite them, on behalf of his father.’
