+++
title = "234 व्रतस्थम् अपि"

+++
**(verses 3.234-235)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (79, 16).—‘The rhinoceros’ horn, deer-skin, sesamum, white
mustard, washed rice,—these should be deposited as purifiers and
destroyers of evil spirits.’

*Viṣṇu* (73, 18).—‘The daughter’s son also is a fit recipient.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 474).—‘The three-staffed Ascetic,
compassion, silver-vessel, the daughter’s son, the Kutapa-tṛṇa, the goat
and the skin of the black antelope, three kinds of sesamum.’

*Devala* (Aparārka, p. 471).—‘Kuśa, sesamum, *elephant’s shadow*,
daughter’s son, honey, clarified butter, Kutapa, the Nīla ox,—these are
sacred at Śrāddhas.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Caturvarga-cintāmaṇi-Pariśeṣa-Śrāddha, p. 448).—‘He
shall feed, with care, the daughter’s son, the father-in-law, the
preceptor, the brother-in-law, the maternal uncle, maternal and paternal
relations, priests officiating at sacrifice, Ācarya and the wife’s
brother.’

*Prabhāsakhaṇḍa* (Do.).—‘Daughter’s son, officiating priest, son-in-law,
sister’s son, father-in-law, pupils, relations by marriage, are to be
fed; specially marriage-relations, daughter’s son, sister’s husband,
sister’s son;—these should not be ignored even though they be
illiterate.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11, 32).—\[Reproduces Manu, 235.\]

*Laghu-Śātātapa* (107).—\[ReproducesManu, 235, reading ‘*satya*,’
‘truthfulness’ in place of ‘*śauca*,’ and ‘*ārjava*,’
‘straight-forwardness’ in place of ‘*atvarā*.’\]

*Smṛtyantara* (Aparārka, p. 474 (471?)).—‘Daughter’s son, vessels made
of rhinoceros-horn, clarified butter of Kapilā cow,—all these have been
described as *Dauhitra*.’

*Vṛddha-Śātātapa* (Do.).—‘Daughter’s son and vessels made of
rhinoceros-horn are called *Dauhitra*.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Do.).—‘Brāhmaṇa, blanket, cows, sun, fire, date, sesamum,
kuśa, time,—these nine have been called *Kutapa*.’

*Matsya-purāṇa* (Do.).—‘The Prācināvita, water, sesamum, left side of
the body, Yava, Nīvāra, Mudga, while flowers, clarified butter,—these
are very dear to Pitṛs.’
