+++
title = "239 चाण्डालश् च"

+++
**(verses 3.239-241)  
**

*Gautama* (15, 24).—‘What is seen by the dog, the Caṇḍāla and the
outcast becomes defiled.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2.17, 20).—‘They forbid the seeing of the
Śrāddha by dogs and unqualified persons.’

*Viṣṇu* (82.6-9).—‘One should not look at a woman in her courses, nor a
dog, nor the village-hog, nor the village-cock.’

*Viṣṇu* (quoted in Caturvarga-cintāmaṇi-Śrāddha, p. 516).—‘No persons of
deficient limbs, nor those with superfluous limbs, nor Śūdras, nor
outcasts, nor persons suffering from serious diseases, shall look at the
Śrāddha.’

*Uśanas* (Do.).—‘The village hog, the cat, the cock, the mungoose, the
woman in her courses, the Śūdra woman or her husband should be removed
to a distance.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘The cock, village-hog, crow, oat, the husband of a girl
married after puberty, impotent man, woman in her courses,—all these
should be always kept away at the time of the Śrāddha;—the cock defiles
by the flapping of its wings, the hog by smelling and the crow by
crowing; the dog by looking at it and the cat by hearing it, the husband
of the girl married after puberty defiles it by receiving gifts, and the
Śūdra by his eyes; the impotent man defiles by Ms shadow and the woman
in her courses by her touch.’

*Bṛhad- Yama* (38).—‘All these should be carefully kept away; otherwise
the Pitṛs go away disappointed and the man remains indebted.’

*Devala* (Aparāka, p. 472).—‘All that is disgusting or unclean, naked
man, a rogue, a woman in her courses, a man dressed in blue or ruddy
clothes, one with ears lopped off, weapons, iron, lead, man clothed in
dirty clothes, food kept overnight,—these shall be avoided at Śrāddhas.
If wine happen even to touch the house, the Śrāddha goes to the
Rākṣasas.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.).—‘The Caṇḍāla, the man clothed in ruddy clothes, the
leper, the outcast, the embryo-killer, one of doubtful birth, relatives
of outcasts,—all these should be avoided when one is performing a
Śrāddha.’

*Brahmāṇḍapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘The naked man and others should not see the
Śrāddha, those who renounce the Veda are called *naked*; the thief, the
cruel man should not he seen, all other wicked men should he avoided.’
