+++
title = "277 युक्षु कुर्वन्"

+++
*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (2.16.8-22).—‘If one performs the Śrāddha on the
first day, he obtains children most of whom are female; if on the second
day, he obtains children who become thieves; if on the third day, he
obtains children endowed with Brāhmic glory; if on the fourth day, he
obtains cattle of poor quality; if on the fifth day, he obtains male
children, many in number and he does not die childless; if on the sixth
day, his son becomes expert in travelling and in gambling; if on the
seventh, his agriculture prospers; if on the eighth, he obtains sound
health; if on the ninth, he obtains one-hoofed cattle; if on the tenth,
his business prospers; if on the eleventh, he obtains articles of iron
and lead; if on ṭhe twelfth, he obtains much cattle; if on the
thirteenth, he obtains many sons, many friends, beautiful children; if
on the fourteenth, he prospers in weapons; if on the fifteenth, he
obtains prosperty.’

*Viṣṇu* (78.36-49).—‘On the first he obtains house and beautiful wives;
on the second, a girl bestowing benefits; on the third, all desirable
things; on the fourth, cattle; on the fifth, beautiful sons; on the
sixth, success in gambling; on the seventh, success in agriculture; on
the eighth, trade; on the ninth, cattle; on the tenth, horses; on the
eleventh, sons endowed with Brāhmic glory; on ṭhe twelfth gold and
silver; on the thirteenth, good luck; on the fifteenth, all desirable
things.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.262-267).—‘Daughters, sons-in-law, cattle, good sons,
gambling, agriculture, trade, cleft-hoofed cattle, one-hoofed cattle,
sons with Brāhmic glory, gold and silver and other metals, gratified
relatives, all desires;—these are obtained by the man who offers Śrāddha
from the first day onwards, excepting the fourteenth; also heaven,
offspring, glory, bravery, lands, strength, son, honour, good luck,
prosperity, supremacy, sovereignty, trade, freedom from disease, fame,
freedom from sorrow, the supreme state, wealth, Vedas, successful
medication, metal-wealth, cows, goats and sheep, horses, longevity—all
this is obtained by one who offers the Śrāddha in accordance with law.’

*Gautama* (15.4).—‘Or, one may perform the Śrāddha whenever he gets
suitable substances, place and Brāhmaṇas.’
