+++
title = "001 षट्त्रिंशद्-आब्दिकञ् चर्यम्"

+++
“The Atharva Veda is here, as in most of the ancient Dharmasūtras, left
out altogether. Baudhāyana alone states that the term of Studentship
extends over forty-eight years, and that rule includes the Atharva
Veda.”—Buhler.

*Medhātithi* (p. 187, l. 10)—‘*Yatraiva hi sviṣṭakṛdādayaḥ*.”—See
*Mīmāṃsā Sūtra* 4.1.18 *et seq*. The question being whether the
*Sviṣṭakṛt* offering (which is made with the remnants of the sacrificial
materials) serves only as a ‘disposal’, or it also serves some
transcendental purpose,—the conclusion is that in tills case a
transcendental result, even though not mentioned in the texts, has to be
assumed.

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 97), where the following
notes are added:—‘*Traividyā* means *the three Vedas*;—the Studentship
over the three Vedas should be made to extend over thirty-six years;
that is, one should devote twelve years to studentship over each of the
three Vedas;—in the case of ‘half the period six years have to be
devoted to each of the three Vedas; and in the ease of ‘quarter of the
period only three years.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 557), where the following
totally different explanation is added:—The meaning of this is as
follows:—In the event, of the Boy studying the three Vedas, his
Studentship should extend over thirty-six years; if he studies only two
Vedas, then over ‘half, *i. e*. half of forty-eight years, or
twenty-four years; that such is the meaning we deduce from the other
texts bearing on the subject;—the ‘quarter’ also has to be similarly
explained. If the ‘half’ and ‘quarter’ were taken in relation to
‘thirty-six years’, then the meaning would he that the Studentship
should extend over *eighteen* and *nine* years respectively; and this
would not agree with any other *Smṛti* text This same consideration gets
rid of the fanciful view set forth by the *Candrikā* that “in the case
of ‘half’, the Boy should devote six years to each of the three Vedas,
and in that of ‘quarter’, three years to each.”

It is interesting that this last view has been adopted by Medhātithi.
(See Translation, p. 11). This view appears to have the support of
Yājñavalkya (l.36), which clearly states that—“Studentship should extend
over either twelve or five years *for each Veda*.”

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 67), which adds that the
studentship over one Veda is to extend over *six* years in the case of
‘half’, and over *three* years in the case of ‘quarter’;—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 166), which adds the following
explanations:—‘*Traivedikam*’, pertaining to the three Vedas, Ṛk, Yajuṣ
and Sāman,—this should be carried on for 36 years,—similarly the vow of
‘Studentship’ pertaining to each single Veda is to be kept for 12
years,—in the case of the ‘*Ārdhika*’ system, 6 years have to be devoted
to each Veda,—and 3 years each in the case of the ‘*Pādika*’ system;—and
in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 779).


