+++
title = "004 गुरुणानुमतः स्नात्वा"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 462) simply as
laying down marriage;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 131) as indicating the
necessity for marriage;—also in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 673);—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 567), as indicating that the ‘Final Bath’
spoken of above (in 1. 245) is meant to be for the purpose of
marriage;—on the ground that the Bath is here spoken of in connection
with the twice-born person *who is going to marry*; while we do not meet
with any such assertion as ‘Having bathed, he should betake himself to
the forest,’ or that ‘having bathed,’ he should bike to Renunciation;—in
the same work on p. 585, in support of the view that Marriage is meant
to be conducive to the fulfilment of the man’s purpose, the following
notes are added:—the term ‘*dvija*’ serves to show that it is only the
twice-born person *endowed with the above-mentioned qualifications* that
is entitled to marriage; and it does not mean that any and every
twice-born person is entitled to it; and that this is so is clear from
the fact that marriage has been laid down only for one who has had his
Initiation and has taken the ‘Final Bath’ of the Studentship. Nor again
can the term ‘*dvija*’ be taken as precluding others; as in that case
there would be no marriage for the *Śūdra*. From all this it follows
that the present text should be taken as enjoining a particular act as
pertaining to a particularly qualified person.—The term ‘*bhāryā*,’
‘wife,’ has been used in view of the future status of the girl; so that
the meaning of the injunction comes to be that ‘he should bring into
existence a *wife* by means of the marriage-ceremony.’—The term
‘*Savarṇā*,’ ‘of the same caste’ is meant to indicate that such a
marriage would be in its principal form: and it does not preclude the
marrying of girls of other castes; this is in fact sanctioned by other
texts.

The same work quotes the verse again on page 747, as laying down the
‘principal’ wife ordained for man.

*Vīramitrodaya* again in its ‘*Lakṣaṇa*’ section (p. 118) quotes the
second half of this verse under the ‘the characteristics of women.’

It is quoted also in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 940) to the effect that
‘*Samāvartana*’ is another name for the concluding rites of
Studentship;—in *Aparārka* (p. 76) as indicating that the ‘Bath’ is
distinct from the *Samāvartana* ceremony;—in *Hemādri* (Dāna, p.
680);—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 403);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 49a.)


