+++
title = "007 हीन-क्रियन् निष्-पुरुषम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 588), where
‘*hīnakriyam*’ is explained as ‘devoid of the performance of such acts
as the sacrifice and the like;’—‘*Niṣpuruṣam*’ as ‘that in which females
are the sole survivors—‘*niśchandaḥ*’ as ‘devoid of Vedic study;’—also
in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 477), which has exactly the same
explanation of precisely the same words.

*Aparārka* (p. 84) quotes this along with the preceding verse;—and adds
the following explanations:—‘*Hīnakriyam*’ means ‘devoid of the proper
performance of the Conception and other Sacramental
Rites,’—‘*Niṣpuruṣam*’ means ‘a family in which girls alone are
born,’—‘*Niśchandaḥ*’ is ‘devoid of Vedic study,’—‘*lomasham*’ is ‘that
members whereof have their body covered with inordinately prominent
hairs,’—and ‘*arshasam*’ means ‘suffering from piles.’—It is quoted in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 204) which adds the following
explanations:—‘*Hīnakriyam*,’ not engaged in the performance of
sacrifices and other religious acts;—‘*Niṣpuruṣam*,’ without a male
master—‘*Niśchandaḥ*’ devoid of Vedic learning—‘*romasham*,’
hairy,—‘*arshasam*’, suffering from the particular disease, piles,—all
these qualifications pertain to the children of the family;—and in
*Saṃskāra*-*ratnamālā* (p. 508), which has the following
notes;—‘*Hīnakriyam*’, not performing the prescribed duties, *i.e*., not
avoiding prohibited acts,—‘*Niṣpuruṣam*’, devoid of male
progeny,—‘*arshasam*’ family in which the disease runs hereditary.


