+++
title = "010 अव्यङ्गाङ्गीं सौम्य-नाम्नीम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 731) as setting
forth the external signs of a marriageable girl;—also in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Lakṣaṇa, p. 118) to the same effect;—and in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 132)
as setting forth the external signs; and for the *internal* signs it
refers to Āśvalāyana who has prescribed the following method;—eight
balls should be made of clay brought from eight different places, and
after some incantations have been uttered over them, the girl should be
asked to pick up one of them; (1) if she picks up that made of clay from
fields with rich corn growing, it is a sign that she would have progeny
rich in grains; (2) if she picks up that of clay brought from the
cattle-shed, she will be rich in cattle; (3) if that of clay from the
altar, she will be an expounder of Brahman;—(4) if that of clay from a
lake that is never dry, she will be endowed with all riches; (5) if that
from the gambling den, she will be crafty;—(6) if that from the
road-crossing, she will be inclined to wander about; (7) if that from
barren soil, she will be unlucky; (8) and if that from the crematoriuûi,
she will destroy her husband.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 78);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 74)
as laying down the external signs of a marriageable girl;—in
*Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 509) which explains ‘*tanulomakeśadaśanā*’ as
‘one the hair on whose chest is scanty, and whose hair and teeth are
fine’;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 200);—and in *Nṛsiṃha-prasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 50a).

‘*Putrikādharmaśaṅkayā*’—‘For fear of her having the character of the
Appointed Daughter’ (Medhātithi);—‘For fear (in the former case) of her
being an Appointed Daughter, and (in the latter) of committing a sin’
(Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa, Rāghavānanda, and ‘others’ in Medhātithi).
Govindarāja adopts Medhātithi’s explanation so far as this phrase is
concerned; but he gives a somewhat different explanation of the first
half of the verse, which according to him, would mean ‘one should not
marry a girl who has no brother, *or* whose father is not known’,—the
two contingencies being independent; while according to Medhātithi, the
second clause (‘whose father is not known’) is subordinate to the
former,—the meaning being that the doubt regarding the girl being an
‘appointed daughter’ would arise if there were no brother, *and* if the
father were not known; for he adds “if the father is known, there is no
fear of the girl being an Appointed Daughter, as he will himself declare
whether or not she has been ‘appointed’.”

According to Medhātithi, therefore, in the translation of the verse, we
should have ‘and’ instead of ‘*or*’.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 474), which adds
the following notes:—He shall not many a girl with regard to whom it is
not known whether or not her father has the intention of making her an
‘appointed daughter;’—the sense is that where there is no fear of this,
one may marry the girl, even though she has no brother. The clause ‘*na
vijñāyeta vā pitā*’ (which, according to this explanation, means ‘*the
intentions* of whose father are not known’) implies that it is possible
for the daughter to be ‘appointed’ even without the Father making an
agreement to that effect with the bridegroom;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p.
82), which adds that this implies that the daughter can be ‘appointed,’
even without express agreement and declaration.

The verse is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 746), where it
is explained as meaning that ‘one should not marry a girl with regard to
whose father it is not known whether or not he has the intention of
making her an Appointed Daughter’; and it adds that it is shown by this
that according to all the sages a daughter can become ‘appointed’ even
without being openly declared to be so;—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p.
414), which explains the meaning to be that one should not marry the
girl with regard to whom it is not known if her father intends to
‘appoint’ her; and adds the same note as *Saṃskāramayūkha*.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 136) quotes this verse and reproduces the same
explanation as above, and deduces the conclusion that ‘one should marry
the girl in whose case there is no fear of this.’

*Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 699) quotes the verse and adds that ‘in a case
where there is no fear of the father having an intention of making the
girl an Appointed Daughter, one may marry the girl, even though she may
have no brother.’

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 80) as indicating that it is
possible for a daughter to be ‘appointed’ secretly; without her being
married under that expressed agreement;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra
p. 181), which adds the same note as *Saṃskāraratnamālā*.


