+++
title = "012 सवर्णाग्रे द्विजातीनाम्"

+++
This verse is quoted by Jīmūtavāhana (Dāyabhāga, p. 209);—and in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 143) as providing permissible substitutes for the
proper ‘wife’;—it explains ‘*avarāḥ*’ (which it reads in place of
‘*varāḥ*’) as *jaghanyāḥ*, ‘lower’;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 98), which
adds the following notes:—There are three classes of Marriage—(1) for
Dharma, (2) for offispring and (3) for physical pleasure; that for
offspring is obligatory, and for this one should have a girl of the same
caste as himself; and in that for Pleasure, or for avoiding the sin of
not entering the second life-stage, one may have girls of other castes,
even a Śūdra girl; in the former also, if no girl of the same caste is
available, girls of other castes may be taken.

The first half of the verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p.
747), which adds the following explanations:—The term ‘*varṇa*’ stands
for *caste*;—‘*agre*’ means *the first marriage*;—the term ‘*dvijāti*’
indicates also persons born of the Śūdra through mixed marriages,
‘natural’ as well as ‘inverse—‘*praśastā*’ means that she is recommended
as the first and best alternative for taking a wife for the purposes of
(1) enjoyment, (2) begetting a son and (3) helping in religious acts
(these three being ‘*dārakarma*’ the *function of the wife*).

This is quoted also in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 493), where we have
the following notes:—‘*Agre*’ means ‘at the first marriage of the
Accomplished Student.’;—‘*dārakarmaṇi*’—for the performance of the
Agnihotra and other rites;—‘*Savarṇā*’—‘she who has the same caste as
the bridegroom’ is recommended;—*i.e*., the Brāhmaṇī for the Brāhmaṇa,
the Kṣatriyā for the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya for the Vaiśya. Having, for
the sake of religious acts, married a girl of the same caste, if one is
desirous of ha ving more wives for purposes of physical enjoyment, he
may marry girls of lower castes (‘*avarāḥ*’) in due order;—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 205), which says that the implication of
the text is that after one has married a girl of the same caste, he may
marry others of other castes also, but they will be less and less
desirable in order; this means that for the sake of Dharma one should
marry a girl of the same caste.


