+++
title = "016 शूद्रावेदी "

+++
According to Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Nandana and Rāghavānanda, the
meaning of this verse is as translated. According to Nārāyaṇa’s
explanation, the translation would read as follows (rendered by
Buhler):—“A man of the family of Atri who weds a Śūdra female, becomes
an outcaste; one of the race of Utathya’s son, on the birth of a son;
and one of Śaunaka’s or Bhṛgu’s race, by having no other but Śūdra
offspring.’ Buhler adds—“It ought to be noted that, according to Kullūka
alone, the three classes refer to Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas
respectively. Rāghavānanda particularly objects to the opinion.”

Burnell ??tes that the rule attributed here to Gautama (Utathya’s ???n)
is not found in the Sūtras of Gautama, where we find only a general
statement regarding the unlawful character of Śūdra offsprings of
twice-born men. And Hopkins says the same thing in regard to the *Smṛti*
of Atri.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 495);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 750); neither of which provides any
explanation of this rather obscure verse;—in *Aparārka* (p. 88), which
explains the meaning to be that “according to Atri and Gautama, the
Brāhmaṇa marrying a Śūdra girl ‘falls’ by the mere act of marriage;
according to Śaunaka, by begetting a son on her; and according to Bhṛgu,
when a grandson is born from her;”—in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 361),
which notes that this and the next verse are only meant to deprecate the
marrying of a *Śūdra* girl, ‘in the improper order’;—and in
*Smṛti-candrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 208), which adds the following notes:—The
Brāhmaṇa marrying a Śūdra girl becomes degraded,—this is the opinion of
Atri and of the ‘son of Utathya,’ *i.e*. Gautama;—hence according to
these authorities the Brāhmaṇa should never marry a Śūdra
girl;—according to Śaunaka, however, degradation results, not from
marrying, but from begetting a child on a *Śūdra* wife,—hence according
to him, the man should avoid the Śūdra wife during the
‘periods—according to Bhṛgu again, even the begetting of a child does
not lead to degradation, what leads to it is the circumstance that the
Brāhmaṇa has no children except those from his *Śūdra* wife,—so that
according to Bhṛgu only so long as he has not got a child from his
Brāhmaṇa wife shall the Brāhmaṇa avoid his Śūdra wife during the
periods’.


