+++
title = "023 षड् आनुपूर्व्या"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 987), which adds
the following explanation:—The six forms of marriage, from the
beginning, are lawful for the Brāhmaṇa, the four beginning with ‘Āsura’
and ending with ‘Paiśāca’ for the Kṣatriya; these latter, with the
exception of the ‘Rākṣasa’ are lawful for the Vaiśya and the Śūdra.

*Aparārka* (p. 91) quotes this and adds that those beginning with Brāhma
and ending with Gāndharva are lawful for the Brāhmaṇa; and the
‘*avarān*’—those named last are lawful for the Kṣatriya; and for the
Vaiśya and Śūdra also these same, excepting the Rākṣasa.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 158) quotes the verse and explains it to mean that
the first six—*i*. e., ‘Brāhma’, ‘Daiva’, ‘Ārṣa’, ‘Prājāpatya’, ‘Āsura’
and ‘Gāndharva’ are, in the order stated, ‘lawful’—*i.e*., not contrary
to law—for the Brāhmaṇa.

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 858) quotes the verse and having offered
the same explanation as the above, adds that four of these are the
principal forms recommended, and the other two are only secondary
substitutes.

*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 223) quotes the verse and explains that the ‘four’
meant are Āsura, Gāndharva, Rākṣasa and Paiśāca; these, excepting the
Rākṣasa, are lawful for the Vaiśya and the Śūdra.

It is quoted in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 100), which adds the following
explanation:—For the Brāhmaṇa, only six forms are commended, beginning
with the *Brāhma* and ending with the *Gāndharva*, the other two are not
commended;—the four beginning with the *Āsura* are lawful for the
Kṣatriya,—these same four, excepting Rākṣasa, for the Vaiśya and the
Śūdra;—thus Rākṣasa is lawful for the Kṣatriya only; so that for the
Brāhmaṇa there are only six, for the Kṣatriya all the eight;—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 231), which also adds that only the first
six. are lawful for the Brāhmaṇa, the latter four for the Kṣatriya, and
for the Vaiśya, and the Śūdra also, all these with the exception of the
Rākṣasa.


