+++
title = "024 चतुरो ब्राह्मणस्याद्यान्"

+++
‘For the Vaiśyas and Śūdras are not particular about their wives’
(Baudhāyana, 1.20.14). *Cf*. the following passages for the different
rules in this respect. Vaśiṣṭha 1.27-28 gives six equivalents to these
eight; so Āpastamba (2.12.3), who admits three as good. Baudhāyana
1.20.10 gives eight and permits but four; so Viṣṇu (24.27). Gautama
gives the eight, admits four, and says some admit six. “The Mahābhārata
(1.73.8 ff.) ascribes descending virtue to each ‘according to Manu’, and
mixing up the sense of verse 23 and verse 27, allows four for a Brāhmaṇa
and six for a Kṣatriya.”—Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 487), as selecting
out of the eight, those that are specially commended;—in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Saṃskāra, p. 858), which adds that of the form specially commended for
the Brāhmaṇa, two are still more important

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 159), adds the following note:—The Brāhma, Daiva,
Ārṣa and Prājāpatya forms have been declared to be commended for the
Brāhmaṇa; for the Kṣatriya, the Rākṣasa alone has been commended; and
for the Vaiśya and Śūdra, the Āsura only. For the Brāhmaṇa the first
four, ending with the Prājāpatya are the primary forms, and the Rākṣasa
must be a secondary substitute for him, because it is lawful for the
next lower caste, Kṣatriya. For the *Kṣatriya*, the Rākṣasa, is the
primary form; and as according to the preceding verse, the Āsura,
Gāndharva, Rākṣasa and Paiśāca are commended for him, the three, besides
the Rākṣasa, must be regarded as secondary substitutes. According to
others, however, the phrase ‘last four’ (of verse 23) stands for the
four beginning with ‘Prājāpatya and according to this, the Rākṣasa being
directly mentioned in the present verse as specially commended for the
Kṣatriya, the secondary substitutes for him would be the Prājāpatya, the
Gāndharva and the Āsura. For the Vaiśya and the Śūdra, the Āsura is the
primary, and the Gāndharva and the Paiśāca,—or the Gāndharva and the
Prājāpatya—secondary substitutes.

*Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 140) quotes this verse and explains that even
though this text mentions among the ‘commended’ forms, the Āsura, where
the bride’s father receives wealth from the bridegroom, yet it must be
understood to sanction the payment of only so much of wealth as may be
required for the decking of the bride.—It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Dana,
p. 683);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 100), which adds that for the
Kṣatriya, the *Rākṣasa* is the principal form, and for the Vaiśya and
the Śūdra, the *Āsura*.

*Aparārka* (p. 91) quotes this verse and adds that for the Brāhmaṇa, the
Brāhma, Daiva, Ārṣa and Prājāpatya are commended; the Āsura and
Gāndharva are neither commended nor forbidden;—for the Kṣatriya, the
Rākṣasa alone is commended; the Āsura and the Gāndharva are neither
commended nor forbidden;—for the Vaiśya and Śūdra, the Āsura alone is
commended; the Gāndharva is neither commended nor forbidden;—the Paiśāca
is forbidden for all castes.

It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, pp. 190 and 231), which adds
that though the first four are ‘commended,’ it does not mean that the
next two are forbidden; all that is meant is that these two are *not
commended*.


