+++
title = "025 पञ्चानान् तु"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 860) in support of
the view that certain forms of marriage are permissible for the,
Brāhmaṇa under abnormal circumstances; and adds the following
explanation:—From among the five—Prājāpatya, Āsura, Gāndharva, Rākṣasa
and Paiśāca,—the Āsura having been singled out as fit for the Vaiśya and
the Śūdra only, and the Paiśāca being deprecated for all, the remaining
three alone are lawful for the Brāhmaṇa; *i*. *e*., the Prājāpatya, the
Gāndharva and the Rākṣasa. This conclusion is based on the analogy of
the livelihood recommended for the next lower caste being permissible
for the higher caste in abnormal times; so that the marriages commended
for the Kṣatriya are permitted for the Brāhmaṇa under abnormal
circumstances.

The same work on page 859 quotes the second half of the verse, to the
effect that the Paiśāca is not lawful for any caste.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 159) quotes it, and offers the following
explanation:—From among the five—Prājāpatya, Āsura, Gāndharva, Rākṣasa
and Paiśāca,—three are ‘lawful *viz*, Prājāpatya, Gāndharva and Rākṣasa.
The second half indicates two of these—*i.e*., the Āsura and Paiśāca—as
unlawful.—Even though the Prājāpatya has been enumerated in verse 24
among the primary forms recommended for the Brāhmaṇa, yet, the same is
here mentioned only as ‘lawful under abnormal circumstances,’ with a
view to indicate that it is inferior to the Ārṣa.

*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra p. 487) quotes this verse and adds the
following explanation—From among the forms beginning with the Brāhma and
ending with the Āsura, three—*i*. *e*., the Brāhma, the Daiva and the
Prājāpatya are lawful; while Ārṣa and the Āsura are unlawful, on account
of their involving the *purchase* of a wife; as between these two also,
one should never adopt the Āsura, which should be avoided as carefully
as the Paiśāca, It goes on to add that here Manu has set forth only a
view that has been held by ‘some one’; according to his own view, there
is no ‘purchase’ involved in the Ārṣa marriage, where the ‘pair of cows’
given are not by way of a ‘price’ for the girl; as has been clearly
declared in verse 53 below. So that, according to Manu, the Ārṣa is as
lawful as the other three.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Dāna, p. 683);—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p.
479), which adds the following explanation:—Among the five, beginning
with the *Brāhma* and ending with the *Āsura*, the first three are
‘righteous,’ as not involving any form of selling;—the *Ārṣa* and the
*Āsura* are ‘unrighteous,’ as involving *bartering*, and lienee, like
the Paiśāca, they should not be adopted even in abnormal circumstances.


