+++
title = "026 पृथक् पृथग्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 860), where the
following notes are added:—This lays down the forms.permissible for the
Kṣatriya under abnormal circumstances.—‘*Pṛthak*’ means *unmixed*, and
‘*Miśra*,’ *mixed*; we have the latter form in a case where the marriage
having been previously settled by mutual understanding between the bride
and the bridegroom, if the bride’s people oppose it, the bridegroom
takes her away by force, as happened in the case of Kṛṣṇa’s marriage
with Rukmiṇī (described in the *Bhāgavata*). A further distinction has
got to be made here: the ‘mixed’ form is permissible only under abnormal
conditions, while the ‘unmixed’ one is a secondary form permissible for
all time; and hence the mention of this latter in the present verse is
merely reiterative (as remarked by Medhātithi also),—the reiteration
being made for the purpose of indicating the utter inferiority of the
‘mixed’ to the ‘unmixed’ form. This implies that for other castes also,
in the event of an ‘unmixed’ form being not possible, the ‘mixed’ form
becomes permissible.—Even though the Paiśāca has been prohibited for
all, yet it has been mentioned among the forms of marriage only for the
purpose of its being permitted for the Vaiśya and the Śūdra under
exceptionally abnormal circumstances.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 160) also quotes this verse as laying down what is
permissible for the Kṣatriya under abnormal conditions. īt adds the
following notes:—‘*Pṛthak pṛthak*’ means the primary and the secondary
forms, laid down as alternatives; and the second half quotes an example
of the ‘mixed’ form; there is a ‘mixture’ of the Gāndharva and Rākṣasa
forms when after a mutual understanding has been arrived at between the
bride and the bridegroom, if the bride’s people raise objections to the
marriage, the bridegroom fights with them and takes away the bride by
force.—This is to be understood only as an illustration; on the same
analogy, other ‘mixtures’ may be permissible for other castes also.—Even
though very much deprecated, the Paiśāca form is permitted under
abnormal circumstances for the Vaiśya and the Śūdra,—as also for such
twice-born persons as have adopted the living of the Vaiśya or the
Śūdra.

This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Dāna, p. 682).


