+++
title = "027 आच्छाद्य चाऽर्चयित्वा"

+++
‘*Arcayitvā*’—Medhātithi and Kullūka take this as well as ‘*ācchādya*’
as referring to both the bride and the bridegroom;—Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghvānanda refer ‘*urcayitvā*’ to the bridegroom only.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 847), where the
following explanatory notes are added:—‘*Ācchādya*,’ ‘having dressed,’
with clothes;—‘*arcayitvā*’ ‘having worshipped’ with garlands,
sandal-paint and so forth;—both these are to be done to the bridegroom,
not to the bride; since both these are related to ‘*āhūya*’ ‘having
invited,’ which cannot refer to the bride;—‘*Svayam*,’ ‘himself,’ should
not be taken (as Medhātithi and Kullūka take it) as precluding the
possiblity of the request for the girl coming from the bridegroom; as
such preclusion would be inconsistent with the rule laying down the
‘selection’ of the bride by the bridegroom.—Further Baudhāyana
says—“After ascertaining his *Śrutaśīle*, learning and character, one
gives the girl to the Student *who seeks for her*,”—and here we find it
distinctly laid down that there should be *a seeking for the girl* by
the bridegroom;—in this passage ‘Student,’ *Brahmacāri*, stands for one
whose observance of studentship has not suffered in any way.—‘The
seeing’ spoken of by Baudhāyana consists in selecting the bride. That
the father should ‘himself’ invite the bridegroom has been laid down as
the peculiar characteristic of the ‘Brāhma’ form of marriage. Such also
is the custom among the people of the south.

This verse is quoted also in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 106) in connection
with a somewhat subtle discussion. The author holds the view that
‘marriage,’ ‘*vivāha*,’ is the *act of taking a wife*, and hence the
‘giving’ of the bride cannot be called ‘marriage,’ as the *giving* is
done by the Father, while the *taking of a wife* is done by the
Bridegroom. On this ground, he argues, the definition of the Brāhma form
of *marriage* provided in the present text of Manu should not be
explained as consisting in the ‘*giving* of the girl’; the word
‘*Dānam*’ has, therefore, to be explained differently, in its
etymological sense ‘*yasmai dīyate tat dānam*’ *i.e*., ‘*dānam*’ means
‘that for the sake of accomplishing which the *giving* is done’;—and as
it is the Student’s ‘taking of a wife’ that is accomplished by *giving*,
it is this ‘taking of the wife’ which should be taken as expressed by
the word ‘*dānam*.’ He argues further that if the ‘marriage consisted in
the *giving* of the girl, then the agent, *person* marrying, would be
the bride’s Father, and not the Bridegroom. The author is conscious of
the syntactical difficulty involved in his explanation, in connection
with the participle ‘*āhūya*’, ‘having invited,’ which, as it stands,
must have the same nominative agent as the ‘giving.’ But he brushes it
off with the remark that the derivation of the verbal root in ‘*āhūya*’
being only a secondary factor, may be ignored, or we may supply some
such word as ‘*sthitaḥ*’;—the meaning thus being—‘the man who takes the
wife when he comes *after being invited*.’

It is interesting to note that the question raised by Raghunandana in
*Smṛtitattva* has been anticipated and satisfactorily explained by
Medhātithi (see *Translation*, p. 58).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 88);—in *Dānakriyākaumudī* (p. 9)
as laying down the necessity of *clothing* the girl properly;—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 61a);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra,
p. 227), which explains ‘*arcayitvā*’ as ‘having worshipped him with
offerings of ornaments and other tilings.’


