+++
title = "045 ऋतुकालाभिगामी स्यात्"

+++
‘*Tadvrataḥ*’—‘In consideration of her’ (Medhātithi and
Kullūka);—‘careful to keep the said rule regarding the *Parvas*’
(Nārāyaṇa). The *Parvas* are described in 4.128.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 497), which adds
the following explanation;—‘*Ṛtu*’, ‘season’, is the name given to the
period of sixteen days, counted from the first day of the menstrual
flow,—during which the woman is capable of conceiving;—during this
‘season’ one should always approach his wife for the purpose of
obtaining a child; and if is only his wife that the man should
approach;—but during the ‘season’ the ‘second days’ should be
avoided:—even apart from the season,one may approach his wife, when
specially desired by her.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 162), which explains
‘*tadvrataḥ*’ as ‘intent upon begetting a child’; and it is added that
what is meant is that ‘one should never omit to approach his wife during
her season’.

*Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 558) quotes the verse and adds the following
notes:—‘*Ṛtu*’, ‘season’, denotes the woman’s capacity of conceiving;
and the time during which the capacity is present is called the ‘period
of the season’—‘*Tadvrataḥ*’ means ‘who is intent upon the
approaching’;—this approaching during the period beyond the ‘season’ is
sanctioned with a view to guarding the impassioned woman from going
astray.

This is quoted in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 724):—and in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 41), which explains ‘*tadvrataḥ*’ as ‘bent upon getting a
son’, and adds that the implication is that ‘during the period, even
though the man may not be keenly desirous of intercourse, yet he should
have recourse to his wife for the purpose of begetting a son’, as
otherwise he would be incurring a sin.


