+++
title = "049 पुमान् पुंसो"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 499), which remarks
that in the second line the words are ‘*same apumān*’;—and in
*Smṛtitattva* (p. 617).

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 160) quotes this verse and adds the
following notes:—‘*Śukra*’ in the man’s case is semen; and in that of
the woman, the red ovule;—Vaśiṣṭha has declared that the human body is
made up of the semen and the ovule;—if the man’s seed happens to be in
excess of the woman’s, then the child is male, even though the sexual
intercourse might have taken place on an odd day of the period; but with
this difference that the male child born under such circumstances would
have an effeminate body;—in the event of the woman’s seed being in
excess of the man’s the child is female, even though the intercourse
might have taken place on an even day of the period; but in this case
the female child would have a masculine body;—and the reason for this
mixed character consists in the fact that the effect of the seed, which
is the material cause of the child’s body, is more potent than that of
the time of conception, which is only a ‘concomitant cause’;—when the
two seeds are in equal quantity, the child is either ‘non-male’ *i.e*.,
a eunuch, or a boy and girl—*i.e*., twins,—this latter being caused by
the bifurcation of the seed at the time of emission, leading to two
portions of it falling on two different parts of the womb.

The verse is also quoted in the *Āhnika* section (p. 559) of
*Vīramitrodaya* where we find the following notes:—

‘*Same*’—when the man’s seed and the woman’s are equal—there is born
either a non-male, a eunuch, or ‘a boy and girl’;—the seeds being
bifurcated into two parts in.equal quantities, twins, consisting of one
boy and one girl, are born;—‘*Kṣīṇe*’—when the seed is weak,—and
‘*alpe*’—small in quantity, there is ‘*viparyaya*’—failure of
conception.

This is quoted in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 16), which adds that if the
intercourse takes place on an ‘even’ day but the proportion of the
woman’s ‘seed’ is larger, then the child will be a female one, but with
masculine features; and if it takes place on an odd day and the
proportion of the man’s ‘seed’ is larger, then the child will be a male
one, but with feminine features;—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 683), which
explains ‘*apumān*’ as ‘sexless’ and there are two children, one male
and another female, if the seed become divided;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p, 25a);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 40) which
explains ‘*Same*’ as ‘when there is equality of the two-seeds,’ and adds
the same notes as those in the *Mayūkha*.


