+++
title = "053 आर्षे गोमिथुनम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 489), which adds
the following explanation:—The ‘*gomithuna*,’ ‘bovine pair,’ (given by
the bridegroom in the Ārṣa marriage) has been called by some people the
‘price’ paid for the girl;—but ‘*this is not true*,’—*i.e*., it cannot
be regarded as the ‘price’, as it does not posses that character; the
‘price’ of a thing is always an indefinite factor; as is found in every
sale-transaction, the price can never be definitely fixed; that which
suffices for buying a thing is called its ‘price’; and this varies with
time and place. In the present case, however, the amount is definitely
fixed; it is the ‘Ārṣa’ marriage when *only* the ‘cow-pair’ is given,
neither more nor less. Thus there being no real *buying* in this case,
the *Ārṣa* marriage must be regarded as lawful.

*Madanapārijāta* (pp. 155-156) takes the verse somewhat differently: It
says that if the ‘cow-pair’ given by the bridegroom is taken by the
bride’s father himself, then it is a clear case of ‘selling’ the girl;
but there would be nothing wrong if the present were accepted by him on
behalf of the bride, as is clear from the next verse.

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 849) quotes it in support of the view that
the ‘cow pair’ given in the *Ārṣa* marriage is not the ‘price’; though
it must come to be so regarded if it is taken through greed, as has been
made clear by Verse 51 above.

This verse is also quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 759) in support of
the view that the *Ārṣa* marriage involves no ‘selling’ of the girl,—and
it reproduces the arguments adduced by *Parāśaramādhava* (above).

It is quoted in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 479), which has the same note as
*Parāśaramādhava* (above); but makes things clear by reading ‘*Kriyate
tāvataiva saḥ*’, which lends itself to the desired interpretation much
more easily than the reading ‘*vikrayastāvadeva saḥ*,’ which calls the
transaction pure ‘selling’;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra p. 231),
which explains ‘*mṛsā*’ as ‘false,’ and declares that the marriage is
unrighteous, in as much as it involves ‘selling’, the cow-pair being the
*price* and not mere *śulka* or ‘fee.’


