+++
title = "103 नैकग्रामीणम् अतिथिम्"

+++
‘*Sāṅgatikam*’—‘Fellow-student, other than a *friend*; or one who is in
the habit of meeting all men on terms of equality, entertaining, them
with jokes and stories.’ \[Medhātithi; whom Buhler quotes wrongly by
including ‘the Vaiśya or a Śūdra or a friend’ in the latter explanation;
the word ‘*vaiśyaśūdrau sahhā cheti*’ stands for verse 110, where,
Medhātithi says, ‘the rule regarding the entertaining of a *Friend* will
come in’\];—‘One who makes a living by telling wonderful or laughable
stories and the like’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘one who
comes on account of his relationship to the Householder’ (Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Bhāryā yatrāgnayaḥ*’—‘Where the wife and the fires are at the time’
(Medhātithi);—‘when the man who has arrived is accompanied by his Wife
and Fires’ (Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa). Buhler is again in the wrong in
translating Kullūka’s view. What Kullūka says is “*etena
bhāryāgnirahitasya pravāsino nātithitvamiti bodhitam*”—*i.e*., ‘what is
meant is that the character of a *guest* does not belong to that
wanderer from home, who is devoid of wife and fires’; and *not* (as
Buhler puts it) that ‘a Householder who has neither (wife or fires) need
not entertain guests.’

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 353), which adds
the following notes:—An inhabitant of the same village, even though he
may arrive in the character of a guest, is not to be entertained as
such;—similarly, the ‘*Sāṅgatika*,’ *i.e*., ‘an old acquaintance,’—is
not to be treated as a guest, if he happens to arrive as one;—an arrival
is to be treated as a guest only when he comes to the house—either his
own or some one else’s—where the Householder’s ‘wife and fires’ happen
to be at the time.


