+++
title = "108 वैश्वदेवे तु"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on l. 103, p. 76) in support of the
view that the Vaiśvadeva offering is not meant to be sanctifìcatory of
the food; it is performed only for the accomplishing of certain
desirable ends for the Householder—*e.g*., what is mentioned under 2.28.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 311) quotes it, and adds the following note:—The
*Vaiśvadeva* offering having been made, and one guest having been duly
entertained, if a second one happens to arrive, and there is no cooked
food left for him, then food should be cooked for him; but out of this
latter no *Vaiśvadeva* offering need be made. If this offering were
meant to be sanctificatory of the food, then it would be necessary to
make it each time the food might be prepared; and the prohibition of the
second offering can be justified only if it is *not* sanctificatory of
the food. Some people have held that this offering has the dual
character (a) of being sanctificatory of the food, and (b) of fulfilling
a desirable purpose for the man.

It is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (II, p. 305), which also adds that the
interdicting of the second *Vaiśvadeva* offering clearly indicates that
it is not regarded as sanctificatory of the food;—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā*
(p. 924), which explains ‘*nivṛtte*’ as ‘after taking his food’;—and in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 284), which adds the following explanation:—‘Where
the Vaiśvadeva offering has been made and the Honouring of the guest
also done, if another guest arrives and there is no cooked food left,
then another food should be cooked and offered to him, but the
Vaiśvadeva offering need not be made out of this second instalment of
cooking.’


