+++
title = "125 द्वौ दैवे"

+++
Buhler is not quite fair to Medhātithi when he says that he takes the
first part of the verse in a peculiar manner, “one must feed two
Brāhmaṇas at the offering to the gods and three for each ancestor (or
nine in all) at the offering to the manes”. This is not quite what
Medhātithi takes the text *to mean*; what he mentions is what ought to
be done, in consideration of the other texts that he quotes.

This verse is quoted in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 511);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Śrāddha, p. 24b);—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, pp. 159 and
114);—and in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 94), which explains ‘*ubhayatra*’
as ‘one in *Devakṛtya* and one in *Pitṛkṛtya*.’

The first quarter of this verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra,
p. 698) as laying down the proportion of Brāhmaṇas to be fed at the two
sorts of rites. If five Brāhmaṇas are to be fed, two should be fed in
connection with the offering to the Gods and three in connection with
that to the *Pitṛs*.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 592) quotes the verse, and explains that the
forbidding of the feeding of a large company is based on the fear that
if a large number of people are invited at a time or place not quite
suited for the purpose, there may be many defects that, would go to
vitiate the entire rite.

*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 287) quotes this verse;—also *Aparārka* (p. 430),
which adds that the term ‘*Pitṛ*’ here includes the maternal grandfather
and all those who have been declared to be ‘deities’ (for the
Śrāddha);—again on p. 463, where it adds that it is meant to eulogise
the lesser number, and not to prohibit large numbers; if it meant the
latter, it would be wrong to feed a large number of men, which is
actually enjoined by other *Smṛtis*.


