+++
title = "131 सहस्रं हि"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 315), which adds the
following notes:—The first sentence here extends upto ‘*nāmaitat*’;
‘*sāyamprātarvidhīyate*’ being a totally distinct sentence; the latter
serves to enjoin the necessity of making the *Vaiśvadeva-offering* both
morning and evening. The meaning thus comes to be that it is only in the
evening that the wife is entitled to perform the ‘*Vaiśvadeva rite*’ *in
the form of the Bali-offering*. Some people hold that the
‘Bali-offering’ herein laid down as to be done by the wife indicates the
*Vaiśvadeva* offering also, and is not meant to be a substitute for the
latter.

It is quoted also in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 929), which 1ms the
following notes:—One sentence runs up to ‘*nāmaitat*’, and
‘*sāyamprātarvidhīyate*’ is another sentence, laying down the two times
for *Vaiśvadeva* offering. It is to this *offering* in the evening alone
that the wife is entitled; and it is not right, as some people have
held, that the name ‘*Vaiśvadeva*’ here stands for the entire rite of
that name, including the *Homa* also; because *Homa* has been expressly
forbidden for women. Others again have held that the singular number in
‘*balim*’ indicates that the only offering that the wife is to make is
that which is made in the sky, *i*.*e*., the ‘*Vaihāyasa-bali*’. But
this also is not right; because in the same context as the present,
another text uses the plural form, ‘*balīn haret*’. Thus the conclusion
is that the entire offering is to be made in the evening either by the
man or his wife.

The verse is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 403), which adds
the following explanation:—*Bali-offering* without mantras, with food
cooked in the evening, is to be done by the wife only in the absence of
the House-holder and his sons;—‘*Homa*’ by women being generally
interdicted by several texts.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 145) which explains it to mean that—‘*in
the absence of males*, the wife should offer *Vaiśvadeva-bali* without
mantras.’


