+++
title = "132 ज्ञानोत्कृष्टाय देयानि"

+++
“The sacrifice identified by the term *Pitṛyajña* is the so-called
*Piṇḍapitṛyajña*, a Śrauta rite (Āśvalāyana, Śrauta-sūtra 2.6-7); and
*Piṇḍānvāhāryaka* is another name for the monthly Śrāddha.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva*, (p. 165), where it is explained
as laying down the order of sequence between *Piṇḍapitṛyajña* and
*Piṇḍānvāhāryaka*, as performed by the man with the consecrated
fire;—the particle ‘*anu*’ denotes repetition;—‘*candrakṣaye*’ means ‘on
the *Amāvasyā* day.’

It is quoted in *Kālaviveka* (p. 354) as laying down *Śrāddha* to be
performed on the *Amāvasyā* day.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 321) quotes it in support of the view that all
those texts that lay down the Vaiśvadeva offering as to be done before
the *Śrāddha*, are to be taken as applying only to the *man who has set
up the Śrauta Fire* (which is what is meant by the term ‘*agnimān*’ in
the present verse);—again on p. 495, where it adds that
‘*māsānumāsikam*’ means ‘every month’; and goes on to explain that
*Piṇḍapitṛyajña* is to be performed also by the man who has not set up
the *Śrauta* Fire; so that for the man with the ‘Śrauta Fire,’ as well
as for the man with the ‘Domestic Fire,’ it is necessary to perform
*Anvādhāna, Piṇḍapitṛyajña* and *Amāvasyā-Śrāddha*,—all on the same day.

*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 40) quotes this verse as permitting the performance
of Śrāddha on a day on which there is *Caturdaśī* in the morning but
*Amāvasyā* for the rest of the day.

This is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 418), which remarks that the repetitive
form of the term ‘*māsānumāsikam*’ is meant to imply that the Śrāddha on
the Amāvasyā day is compulsory;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 609) to the
effect that ‘*Pitṛyajña*’ should be performed before the ‘*Śrāddha*’;—in
*Hemādri* (Śrāddha, pp. 72,171,321 and 1064);—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā*
(pp. 956 and 989) to the effect that the *Amāvasyā-Śrāddha* should be
performed after *Piṇḍapitṛyajña*; it explains ‘*Piṇḍānvāhāryakam*’ as
*Piṇḍānām piṇḍapitṛyajñārthānām anu paścāt āhṛyate kṛyate iti*,’ and
calls it a name for the *Amāvasyā*

*Śrāddha*;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 185), which explains
‘*Piṇḍānvāhāryakam*’ as *Pārvaṇaśrāddha*, and expounds the same as
‘*piṇḍāḥ anu brāhmaṇabhojanānantaram āhriyante asmin*’;—in
*Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 6) as laying down *Amāvasyā-Śrāddha*;—and in
*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, pp. 431 and 492).




