+++
title = "134 ज्ञाननिष्ठा द्विजाः"

+++
*Medhātithi* (p. 241, l. 25)—‘*Yaccāṅgajātam etc*.’—The Mīmāṃsakas,
specially those belonging to the ‘Prābhākara’ school, classify
‘subsidiaries to an act’ under four heads:—(1) class-character, (2)
quality, (3) substance, and (4) such things as are denoted by verbs,
*i.e*., actions. The last of these is grouped under two heads—(1) Those
directly helpful, called *Sannipatyopakāraka*, and (2) those indirectly
helpful, called ‘*Ārādupakāraka*’. That which produces its direct
effects in certain things conducive to the fulfilment of the sacrificial
act, is its *Sannipatyopakāraka*; *e.g*., the *sitting* of the
sacrifìcer, the *threshing of the corn* and so forth. The
*Sannipatyopakāraka* is of four kinds—(1) that which brings into
existence a certain substance; *i.e*., the kneading of the flour, which
brings into existence the dough;—(2) that which leads to the acquisition
of a certain substance; *e.g*., the act of milking the cow;—(3) that
which produces some change in an already existing substance; *e.g*., the
boiling of clarified butter;—(4) that which is purely purificatory,
*e.g*., the sprinkling of water over the corn. The subsidiaries that
belong to this class do not produce any transcendental result—

*Apūrva*—of their own; they are related to the result produced by the
sacrificial act to which they are subsidiary......... The

*Ārāpudakāraka*—or indirectly helpful subsidiaries—are of two kinds—(1)
those that fulfil only a transcendental purpose and do not produce any
visible effects in any material substance; *e.g*., the small offerings
made during the *Darśapūrṇamāsa*, such as the *Samid-yāga* and the
rest;—and (2) those that produce both transcendental and visible
effects; *e.g*., the *Payovrata*, the act of the Sacrificer and his wife
living, during the performance of the *Jyotiṣṭoma*, purely on milk.
These latter, from their very nature, are such acts as have their own
*minor* resultant *Apūrvas*, which go to help in the fulfilment of the
*Apūrva* of the main sacrificial act itself. \[For a discussion on this
subject, the reader is referred to the *Prābhakara School of Pūrva
Mīmāṃsā*, pp. 180-185.\]

This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 377).
