+++
title = "154 यक्ष्मी च"

+++
‘*Yakṣmī*’—‘Invalid in general, or (according to ‘others’) one suffering
from consumption’ (Medhātithi, who has favoured the latter explanation
on p. 159 of the text).

‘*Nirākṛtiḥ*’—‘One who omits the Great Sacrifices, even though entitled
to their performance’ (Medhātithi, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘one who
forsakes the Vedas’ (Govindarāja);—‘one who does not recite the Veda, or
has forgotten it’ (Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

‘*Gaṇābhyantaraḥ*’—‘A member of a corporation of men subsisting
conjointly upon one means of livelihood’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja and
Nārāyaṇa);—‘the headman of a village, or leader of a caravan’ (added by
Nārāyaṇa);—‘one who misappropriates the money of a corporation’ (Kullūka
and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 560), which explains
‘*paśupālaḥ*’ as ‘one who tends cattle as a means of
living’,—‘*Nirākṛtiḥ*’ as ‘atheist,’—and ‘*gaṇābhyantaraḥ*’ as ‘a
Brāhmaṇa who is a member of a *Maṭha*, a religious corporation.’

*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 687), which adds (on p. 690) the following
notes:—The ‘*yakṣmī*’ is the ‘consumptive’;—the ‘cattle-tender’ meant to
be excluded is one who does the work even in normal times,—the
‘*parivettā*’ is the younger brother who takes a wife or sets up the
fire, before his elder brother; and ‘*Parivitti*’ is the elder brother
thus superseded,—the ‘elder brother’ here meant being the ‘uterine
brother’, as there is nothing wrong in the ‘superseding’ of other kinds
of brothers; though, under certain circumstances, the ‘superseding’ of
the elder uterine brother also is not considered wrong; *e*. *g*., when
the brother happens to be impotent, or away in foreign lands, or become
an outcaste, or turn an ascetic, or entirely given to yogic practices,
and as such has renounced the world, and so forth;—the ‘*nirākṛti*’ is
one who, having read the Veda, has forgotten it’;—and the
‘*gaṇābhyantara*’ is ‘one who is a member of a group of men belonging to
various castes and engaged in uncertain ways of living.’

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 481);—and in
*Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 40), which explains ‘*yakṣmī*’ as ‘one
suffering from consumption’ and ‘*nirākṛtiḥ*’ as ‘one who does not
perform the Five Daily Sacrifices,’—and ‘*gaṇābhyantaraḥ*’ as ‘one who
makes a living by a temple dedicated to the public.’


