+++
title = "160 धनुः-शराणाङ् कर्ता"

+++
‘*Agredidhiṣūpatiḥ*’—According to Medhātithi, this means (a) the
‘*Didhiṣūpati*’, *i.e*., one who makes love to his brother’s widow
(according to 173 below)—and also (b) the ‘*Agredidhisū*’, *i.e*., the
man whose wife dallies with another person (according to definition
quoted by Medhātithi on 173). This interpretation is supported by Manu
3.173 (read with Prajāpati, quoted by *Maskari Bhāṣya* on Gautama sūtra
15.16), which adds to Manu 173, the further assertion *saṃ caiva jīvato
bhrātuḥ sa cāgredidhiṣūḥ samṛtaḥ*, which would apply the name
*agredidhiṣū* to that man whose wife dallies with his younger brother,
during his own life-time. It may be remarked that Gautama (15.16)
contains the compound *agredidhiṣūpatididhiṣūpati*; and it has been
construed by the *Maskari-bhāṣya* to mean *agredidhiṣū* and
*didhiṣūpati* (thus supporting Medhātithi); or (1) *agredidhiṣūpati*
(husband of a girl who is married before her elder sister) and
*didhiṣūpati* (husband of a girl whose younger sister is married before
her).

Medhātithi does not resolve the compound, as Buhler puts it, into
‘*agredidhiṣūpati*’ and ‘*didhiṣūpati*’; in fact he actually denies that
there is any such person as ‘*agredidhiṣūpati*’;—though it is difficult
to see how this statement here by Medhātithi is to he reconciled with
what he says under verse 173 below, that ‘the definition of
*Agredidhiṣūpati* should be learnt from another *Smṛti*’,—and this
definition is quoted as ‘if the brother is alive, the man is to be known
as *Agredidhiṣūpati*; so that the *Didhiṣūpati* is the man making love
to his *dead* brother’s wife’ (according to Manu 3.173), while
*Agredidhiṣūpati* is one whose wife dallies with his younger brother
during his own life-time.

Kullūka quotes Laugākṣi to the effect that ‘when the younger sister is
married while the elder is still unmarried, the former is the
*Agredidhiṣū* and the latter the *didhiṣū*’; and on the strength of this
he would exclude ‘the husband of the younger sister marrying before her
elder sister. But as rightly remarked by Buhler, this definition of
Laugākṣi cannot be accepted in the interpretation of Manu who has
himself (in verse 173) provided a totally different definition. It is
interesting to note that the Maskaribhāṣya on Gautama (15.16) attributes
to Manu the definition quoted by Kullūka as Laugākṣi’s.

*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, which quotes this text of Manu on p. 688, and
explains it on p. 693) cites the verse quoted by Kullūka (from
Laugākṣi), but attributes it to Devala, and explains the term
‘*agredidhiṣūpati*’ in the same manner as Kullūka.

‘*Dyūtavṛttiḥ*’—‘He who makes a living by gambling’ (Medhātithi, who
does *not* explain the term to mean ‘one who makes others play for his
profit’; also Nārāyaṇa and Nandana);—‘the keeper of a gambling-house’
(Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

‘*Putrācāryaḥ*’ is explained in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 694) as
‘*akṣarapāṭhakaḥ*’ the teacher of alphabets. So the status of the
Primary School Teacher of ancient days was no better than that of their
representatives at the present day!

This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 481).


