+++
title = "161 भ्रामरी गन्डमाली"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 687), which adds
(on p. 688) the notes that—‘*Jaṭila*’ means the

Student, who is qualified by the adjective ‘*anadhīyānaḥ*’, so that the
person precluded is the Student *who is not reading*,—one who is reading
being regarded as fit to be invited, the unreading Student could not be
included under the term ‘not learned in the Veda,’ as there is every
likelihood of people falling into the mistake that even though not
reading, the Student deserves to be invited;—the ‘*Durvāla*’ is one who
is ‘bald’, or ‘tawny-haired’;—the ‘*Kitava*’ is ‘one addicted to
gambling’;—the ‘*Pūgayājaka*’ is ‘one who sacrifices for hosts.’—It goes
on to add that the addition of the term ‘*Śrāddha*’ indicates that the
persons here enumerated are to be excluded from invitation only at
Śrāddhas, and not from the rites performed in honour of the gods;
otherwise the addition would be superfluous.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 450), which explains ‘*jaṭilam*’ as ‘the
*Brahmacārī*,’ and ‘*durbāla*’ as ‘*khalatiḥ*;’—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha,
p. 480);—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Śrāddha, p. 9a).

‘*Jaṭilam ca anadhīyānam*’—Medhātithi takes ‘*anadhīyānam*’ as
qualifying ‘*jaṭilam*’, explaining the two together as ‘the Student who
is not learned; *i.e*., who began the study, hut did not complete
it’;—Kullūka also takes the two together; but explains ‘*anadhīyānam*’
as ‘one who has only had his Upanayana performed, but has not been
taught the Veda’; and adds that ‘this implies that one may invite that
Student *who is still studying the Veda*, though he may not have
mastered it.’


