+++
title = "171 दाराग्निहोत्रसंयोगङ् कुरुते"

+++
*Medhātithi*—(P. 259, l.5)—‘*Bhrātarītyādi paṭhitam*’,—*i.e*., in
Gautama ‘*Pravrajite nivṛttiḥ prasaṅgāt*’ (18.16)... ‘*Bhrātari chaivam
jyāyasi yavīyān kanyāgnyupayameṣu*’ (18.18);—the latter *Sūtra* is
referred to again in 1.11.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.223) in the sense that—‘the
younger brother, who takes a wife or sets up the Fire, before his elder
brother has done so, is called *Parivettā*, and the elder brother is
called *Parivitti*.’

*Aparārka* deals with this subject in detail, under this same text of
Yājñavalkya.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 170) quotes this verse and explains that the ‘elder
brother’ meant here is the *uterine* brother, not the step-brother.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 760), which also explains
that the ‘elder brother’ meant is the *uterine brother*, as is clearly
declared in a text quoted from Garga. It quotes another verse from
‘Manu’, which is not found in our texts:—

> agraje brahmacaryasthe yo'nujo dārasaṅgraham \|  
> kurute parivettā sa paricitto'grejo bhavet \|\|

It has a curious note regarding the exact signification of the term
‘*ṣodarya*’ (generally understood to mean *uterine*): It
says—‘*sodaryatva*’ is of three kinds—(1) due to the father being the
same; (2) due to the mother being the same, and (3) due to both being
the same; the idea that ‘*sodaryatva*’ is based upon the sameness of the
Father is derived from the *Garbhopaniṣad* text that ‘at first the fetus
is born in the male’, as also from the *Mahābhārata* text—‘Having stayed
in the father’s stomach, he entered the Mother through his semen’; and
again in the same work, Kacha is representented as saying to Devayānī
that she was his ‘sister’ because she had lived in the same father’s
stomach as he himself had done.

The verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācara, p. 690), where also
‘elder brother’ is explained as the *uterine brother*;—also in
*Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 723), where the construction of the phrase
‘*agraje sthite*’ is explained as ‘*agraje anūḍhe akṛtāgnihotre ca
sthite*’. The untraced verse from ‘Manu’ quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* is
quoted here also.

This verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 233) as forbidding the
setting up of the Fire by the younger brother if it has been already set
up by his elder;—and in *Aparārka* (p. 445, and again on p. 1050) as
defining the *Parivitti*;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p. 811), which notes that
this refers to *uterine* brothers only, and that also not in cases where
the elder brother is either an outcaste, or insane, or sexless, or
blind, or deaf, or dumb, or idiot, or dwarf, or leper, or suffering from
leucoderma, or consumptive, or suffering from dropsy, or from some
incurable disease, or heretic, or renunciate, or gone away for a long
time;—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 371);—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p.
514).


