+++
title = "197 सोमपा नाम"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 83);—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 697) as laying down certain details
regarding the inviting of Brāhmaṇas at *Śrāddhas*;—in *Mitākṣarā* (on
1.225), as justifying the option of inviting the Brāhmaṇas on ‘the day
following’ (the ‘previous day’ *i.e*., on the day of the performance
itself);—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, pp. 1133 and 1146), which adds the
following notes—‘*Pūrvedyuḥ*’, ‘on the previous day,’ *i.e*., on the
Caturdaśī day if the Śrāddha is to be performed on
Amāvasyā;—‘*aparedyuḥ*’, ‘on the same day as the Śrāddha itself is
performed.’ We have an option here; he who can observe the rules of the
invitation for two days may do the inviting on the preceding day, others
who are not able to do so should do it on the Śrāddha day; the former
would be more meritorious as involving greater amount of self-denial;
others hold that the invitation is to be made on the previous day, if
the performer remembers the Śrāddha to be performed on the coming day;
and if one does not remember it, then he may invite the Brāhmaṇas on the
same day as the Śrāddha; others again hold that the invitation is to be
made on the Śrāddha day only when, for some reason, it cannot be made on
the preceding day; another view is that Householders are to be invited
on the previous day and Renunciates and Students on the same day. It
explains ‘*tryavarān*’ as ‘at least three,’ *i.e*., three, five or
seven; and adds that ‘*samyak*’ qualifies ‘*nimantrayet*’.


