+++
title = "222 पितामहो वा"

+++
*Medhātithi* (P. 274, l. 19)—‘*Dvau hi kālau etc*.’—See Gautama 5.
7—‘*Bhāryādiragnirdāyādirvā*.’

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 581) as
laying down the offering of *Homa* into the hand of the Brāhmaṇa. In
this connection it enters into a long discussion. The text speaks of the
‘absence of fire the ‘fire’ meant here must be the *Śrauta* and *Gṛhya*
fires. *Absence* again is of three kinds: ‘previous absence,’
‘destruction,’ and ‘absolute absence there is ‘previous absence’ of fire
prior to one’s entering the ‘Household’;—after the man has entered the
Household, if the fire goes out, either through carelessness, or through
the break up of the Household, there is ‘destruction’ of fire, which can
be resusciated by being set up again, or by the resumption of the
Household;—there is ‘absolute absence’ of fire in the case of the
Life-long Student, who never marries, and therefore never sets up either
the *Śrauta* (Sacrificial) or the *Gṛhya* (Domestic) fire. It is only in
the case of the first two kinds of ‘absence’ of the

Sacrificial and Domestic fires, that it being impossible to set up the
Fire at the time of offering the *Śrāddha*, the *Homa* should be offered
into the hands and such other receptacles as have been prescribed.—Some
people have held that *Homa* can be offered into the *ordinary* fire
also; but according to this view there could be no ‘absence of fire,’ as
the *ordinary fire* can always be set up without difficulty; so that
there would be no occasion for advantage being taken of the permission
to offer the *Homa* into the hand or other receptacles; and this would
render the present text, and others similar to it, entirely futile. All
this points to the conclusion that the Homa at Śrāddha should never be
offered into the *ordinary* fire.

*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 739) quotes this half of the verse, and
remarks that it refers only to the case of the *Homas* offered by a
Student

It is quoted also in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.237) in support of the view that
the offering of *Homa* into the hand is meant to apply only to the
Case—(1) of the *Śrāddhas* prescribed for the purpose of attaining a
definite end, such as the one laid down to be performed under such lunar
asterisms as *Kṛttikā* and the rest, for the purpose of attaining
heaven,—(2) of the *Ābhyudayika Śrāddha* laid down to be performed on
the occasion of the son’s marriage and such other ceremonies,—(3) of the
*Aṣṭakā Śrāddha*, laid down to be performed on the eighth day of the
month,—and (4) of the *Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa Śrāddha*.

The first half of the verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 316).

The whole verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 1337), which has the
following ṅotes:—The second line is a *Hetuvannigada Arthavāda*, the
Brāhanaṇa being eulogised as serving the same purposes as the fire into
which libations are poured,—‘*mantradarśibhiḥ*’, ‘by those learned in
the Veda.’


