+++
title = "224 पाणिभ्यान् तूपसङ्गृह्य"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 1368), which has the
following notes:—‘*Annasya vardhitam*’, ‘pot filled with food’, should
be brought from the kitchen, with both hands, and placed before the
Brāhmaṇa, in a clean place,—‘*śanakaiḥ*’ gently, so that the pot does
not break or make any sound,—‘*Svayam*’, himself,—this is the best
course; other Smṛti texts permit of the cooking etc. being done by the
wife;—in ‘*Śrādhakriyākaumudī* (p. 158), which explains ‘*vardhitam*’ a
s ‘filled’;—it adds that the man should himself place the vessel near
the Brāhmaṇa on the square platform made for that purpose and in
*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 545), which explains ‘*annasya*’ as
‘*annena*’ and ‘*vardhitam*’ as ‘filled’.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 229), which adds the following
notes:—The genitive ending in ‘*annasya*’ has the sense of the
instrumental;—‘*vardhitam*’ means ‘filled’, which qualifies the
‘*pātra*, receptacle’ understood;—‘*upanikṣipet*’—keep near, for
serving; *i*. *e*., the food should not be served into the dish directly
from the cooking-pot; the cooking pot should be brought near the dish,
and placed on the ground; the food should be served on the dish with the
two hands, with which another vessel is held.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 492), which adds the explanation that
‘the man should carry with his own hands the vessel which has been
filled with food in a place other than the one where the Brāhmaṇas are
to be fed, to a place near the Brāhmaṇas and keep it there gently, all
the time thinking of his Pitṛs’;—‘*annasya vardhitam*’ meaning that
quantity of food which has been set aside as the share of one feeder.


