+++
title = "245 असंस्कृत-प्रमीतानान् त्यागिनाम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Varṣakriyākaumudī*, (p. 359), as enumerating
those entitled to the scattered food;—in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p.
562), which explains ‘*kulayoṣitām tyāginām*’ as ‘those who abandon the
ladies of their family without cause’, and adds that the food scattered
in the dish is for those who have died without sacraments, while that on
the ground is for the slaves;—in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 275);—and in
*Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 1512), which adds the following
notes:—‘*asaṃskṛta*’ stands for those whose Upanayana has not been done,
and also the unmarried girls,—‘*tyāginaḥ*’ are
suicides,—‘*kulayoṣitām*’, those ladies to whom water-offerings have not
been made;—or ‘*kulayoṣitām tyāginām*’ may be taken together, meaning
‘those who have abandoned their wives and ladies without cause.’

‘*Tyāginām kulayoṣitām*’—‘For those who abandon their elders *and* for
unmarried maidens; or to those who have abandoned the ladies of their
family, without fault’ (Medhātithi);—‘For women who have forsaken their
families’ (Govindarāja);—‘suicides and childless women’ (Nārāyaṇa);—‘For
ascetics and...’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 376) without
any comment;—and in *Aparārka* (p. 504), which explains ‘*bhāgadheyam*’
as ‘share’; and adds that what is meant is that ‘for those persons of
his family who have died without Upanayana, and for those who have
forsaken the ladies of his family or such others as should not be
forsaken,—one should assign the food left in the dish in which the
Brāhmaṇas have eaten, as also that which has been scattered on the
grass’.


