+++
title = "261 पिण्डनिर्वपणङ् के"

+++
‘*Parastāt*’—This is the right reading, and not ‘*purastāt*’; as it is
clear that the offering is to be made *after* the feeding of the
Brāhmaṇas.

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 599),
which, accepting the reading ‘*purastāt*’, explains the line to mean
that ‘the offering is made *before* the Brāhmaṇas begin to eat, just
after they have been worshipped, or after the offering has been made
into the fire.’—The whole verse is quoted in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla,
p. 563), which says that ‘*prakṣipanti etc*.’ is only reiterative of
what has been prescribed in the preceding verse.

*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 752) also quotes the first half, reading
‘*purastāt*’; and adds the following explanation:—Some people hold that
the offering of the Ball is to be done *before* the Brāhmaṇas have
eaten, just after they have been worshipped, or after the offerings have
been made into the fire;—but from the use of the term ‘*kechit*’ in the
text, it seems that according to others the Ball is to be offered after
the Brāhmaṇas have eaten, but before they have washed, or after they
have washed, but either before or after they have been dismissed. The
conclusion on this point is that the offering of the Ball is to be done
*before* the feeding of the Brāhmaṇas only at inferior *Śrāddhas* that
are performed before the Amalgamating Rite, while at this Rite itself as
well as at those that follow it, it is to be done *after* the feeding.
The difference in this practice is due to the custom obtaining among the
followers of the different Vedic Schools.


