+++
title = "279 प्राचीनावीतिना सम्यग्"

+++
‘*Ānidhanāt*’—‘Until death’ (Medhātithi and Govindarāja);—‘up at to the
end of the ceremony’ (Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa, Nandana and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 725) in support of
the view that ‘all the detailed Śrāddha rites beginning with the pouring
of water round the dish to the end should be done while one has his
thread hanging on his right, shoulder’;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p.
345), which explains ‘*atandriṇā*’ as ‘without laziness,’—‘*ānidhanāt*’
as ‘*beginning* with death,’ adding that the Maithilas explain this to
mean ‘till the end of the ceremony’;—in *Śrāddho* *kriyākaumudi* (p.
44), which explains ‘*apasavyam*’ as

‘*vāmāvartakrameṇa*,’ and ‘*ānidhanāt*’ as ‘to the end of the Śrāddha.’

*Smṛtitattva* quotes this verse on p. 185, in support of the view that
the *Ulkā-bhramaṇa*, ‘Brandishing of the Firebrand,’ which is done on
the fifteenth day of *Kārtika*, being an act done in honour of the
Pitṛs, should be done with the sacred thread passing over the right,
shoulder;—again on p. 231, in support of the view that the reciting of
certain hymns that is laid down as to be done during the *Śrāddha*,
should be done with the sacred thread passing over the right
shoulder;—again on p. 236, where it is explained that ‘*apasavya*’ means
‘*pitṛ-tīrtha,’ i.e*., the part of the palm between the thumb and the
index-finger;—and again in vol. II, p. 303, in support of the view that
all the rites that are performed ‘*after death*’ (*ānidhanāt*) should be
done with the sacred thread passing over the right shoulder.

It is quoted in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 527), which reads
‘*atantriṇā*’ and explains it as ‘*anolasena*,’ and ‘*apasavyam*’ as ‘on
the left side,’ ‘*ānidhanāt*’ as ‘till the end of the performance’;—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Śrāddha, p. 24b);—and in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 1107),
which has the following notes:—‘*Prācīnāvītinā*,’ with the sacred thread
hanging over the right shoulder and under the left
arm-pit,—‘*ānidhanāt*,’ ‘till the end,’—‘*darbhapāṇinā*,’ is added with
a view to show that everything that is done for the sake of the *Pitṛs*
should be done kuśa in hand.


