+++
title = "282 न पैतृयज्ञियो"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* on p. 174, as laying down that the
Śrāddha during the ‘dark fortnight’ should be preformed on the Moonless
Day;—on p. 35, II, as precluding the offering of Homa-libations in the
ordinary fire;—and again on II, p. 136, to the same effect.

It is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (II, p. 615), which remarks that it
appears as if it were forbidding the performance of Śrāddha by a man
‘with the Fire’ on any but the Moonless Day; and proceeds to note that
some people have taken this to mean that if a Śrāddha happens to fall on
any other day, the man ‘with the Fire’ should do the ‘*saṅkalpa*’ on
that day, but postpone the actual performance till the Moonless Day;—but
trustworthy people have held that what is meant is that for the man
‘with the Fire,’ even if there should arise the necessity of performing
a Śrāddha on another day, he should always wait till the Moonless Day.

This verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 111) which remarks that the
first half assigns the reason for what is asserted in the second half.
It quotes three opinions—(1) Some people accept this verse in its
literal sense; (2) ‘our teachers’ hold that it is meant to forbid for
the man ‘with the fire’ the performance of that Śrāddha only which is
done in the form of the ‘*Piṇḍapitṛyajña*’;—(3) ‘our own opinion’ is
that it serves to lay down that if any Śrāddha happens to fall on other
days, the Man ‘with the fire’ should do it on the Moonless Day’;—in
*Puruṣārthacintāmaṇi* (p. 369), which reproduces the note from
*Hemādri*;—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 1679) which explains the meaning
as—‘The Agnihotri should not perform any Śrāddha in which the
ritualistic details of the *Darśa-Śrāddha* are not adopted’; that is, he
should perform the Śrāddha only in the manner of the *Darśa-Śrāddha*; it
does *not* mean that ‘he should not perform any Śrāddha except the
Darśa’;—and in *Śrāddhakriyākaumudī* (p. 7), which rejects the view set
forth by *Hemādri*, attributing it to Halāyudha.


