+++
title = "001 राजधर्मान् प्रवक्ष्यामि"

+++
It has already been pointed out that the term ‘*Dharma*’ denotes *what
ought to be done, duty*, so what the author promises in the present
verse is that he is now going to describe *what ought to be done by the
King*.

This duty is of two kinds—(1) pertaining to visible things, such as the
‘six courses of action’ and the like, and (2) pertaining to invisible
things, such as the *Agnihotra* and the like. In the present context it
is the former that is chiefly dealt with; and in fact it is only those
forms of activity that are generally known as ‘kingly duties.’

The term ‘*rājan*’, ‘king,’ in the present context, does not stand for
the *Kṣatriya caste*; it stands for that person who fulfills the
conditions of having been anointed, possessing the rights of sovereignty
and so forth. It is for this reason that the *Text* adds—‘*How the Lord
of Men should conduct himself*.’—The use of the term ‘lord of men’
indicates that what is stated here is applicable to the person who has
sovereignty over the people.

The duties expounded in the present connection are based, not all upon
the Veda, but on other sources of knowledge also. Among those based upon
other sources of information, those alone are stated here which are not
contrary to the *Science of Duty* (*Ethics*). Says *Kātyāyana*—‘One
shall renounce the Science of Politics and act according to the Science
of Duty.’

‘*Yathāvṛttaḥ*,’ ‘*how he should conduct himself*’;—the compound is to
be expounded as ‘*yaḍyatprakārakam vā vṛttam yasya*,’ a *Bahuvrīhi*
compound; the third factor referred to by it being the King. If the
compound were explained in the manner whereby the denotation of the
words of the compound itself formed the principal denotation of the
compound itself,—then it would have to be an *Aryayībhāva* (in the form
‘*yathāvṛttam*’).—‘*Conduct*’ stands for the action of protecting the
people and also of accomplishing some transcendental ends.

‘*Coming into existense*’, being created; as is going to be described
under verse 3—‘the Lord created the King’ and so forth.

‘*Excellent*’, highest,—‘*success*’, in the form of undisputed
sovereignty.

This verse states the rewards of the due fulfilment of kingly duties
(1).


