+++
title = "002 ब्राह्मम् प्राप्तेन"

+++
‘*Brahma*’ is Veda; the ‘*training* under gone according to the Veda is
called ‘*brāhma*’ ‘*Vedic*’; that which consists in the learning of the
meaning of the texts by studying the Veda, and which is accomplished in
obedience to the injunction of Vedic study. The Initiatory Ceremony also
is rightly called ‘Vedic’, in view of the fact that it is gone through
for the purpose of getting up the Veda; as the author is going to say
later on (verse 43)—‘From persons learned in the three Sciences he shall
learn the Three-Fold science etc’. If this (learning the meaning of the
Vedic texts) were not meant by the present verse, then it would he
asserting what is already known; as in that case the ‘sacrament’ could
only stand for the forty-eight ‘sacramental rites’ laid down in the
Smṛtis, beginning with ‘Conception’ and ending with the ‘Final
Sacrifice’.

‘*By the Kṣatriya*.’—This indicates that the *Kṣatriya* alone is
entitled to Kingship. In the absence of the *Kṣatriya* however, a
substitute also may be accepted; otherwise the people would become
exterminated (for want of a protector). Such is the sense of the text.

‘*Of all*’—who pay taxes, as well as those who are poor and helpless.

‘*This*’;—this refers to the people living in his kingdom, in villages
as well in cities.

‘*According to law’.—‘Law*’ stands for the scriptures, specially the
scriptures dealing with ‘Dharma’ or Duty, and not those relating to
‘Artha’ or ‘Policy’ and composed by Auśanas and other writers.
‘According to this’—*i.e*., not acting contrary to it.

‘*Protection*’—Guarding; *i.e*., removing troubles, guarding the weak
against the strong, and seeing that they do not act against the law.
‘*Protection*’ means *saving from trouble*; the transgressing of law
brings impercepible trouble; s o that when people do not transgress it,
they become saved from that trouble, by the King. It might be argued
that the punishment inflicted by the King (for transgressions of the
law) is also painful. But the pain caused by such punishment would be
infinitesimal, as compared with the terrible sufferings undergone in
hell.

‘*Shall be done*’;—this is the Injunction.

What prompts and entitles the King to do all this is explained in
Discourse VIII—(2)


