+++
title = "023 देव-दानव-गन्धर्वा रक्षांसि"

+++
‘Devas’—*i.e*., the God of Rain, of Wind, the Sun and so forth.

‘*Subserve the experiences’—e.g*., by periodic heat, cold and rain, help
in the development of the herbs and so forth.

All this is due to their being afraid of being punished. If it were not
so, why should the Sun and the Moon, or Brahmā and the God of Rain, not
swerve from their appointed task? If the Sun were not under some such
control, he might not rise at all for two or three days; from fear of
punishment, however, he never transgresses the prescribed limits. Says
the Śruti text—‘It is through fear that the Sun shines, it is through
fear that the Moon shines, and it is through fear that Fire and Wind
(function.)’

That the Dānavas and other evil spirits do not go on destroying the
Universe all day and night, is due to the power of punishment. That the
birds that adorn households—such as the parrot and the rest—do not take
out the eyes of children,—that kites, crows, vultures and eagles do not
devour the young children,—this also is due to the same cause.

Reptiles, serpents, abounding as they do, in anger and poison, do not
all gather together and sting all living beings,—this also is due to the
power of punishment.

For these reasons the text has provided this eulogy on punishment that,
when even the extremely powerful gods and the rest, and the
non-intelligent things also do not swerve from their appointed path,
through fear of punishment,—what to say of human beings!

In this connection the ancients have quoted the following verse—‘Seeing
the humble position of the wild *Pāṭala* -tree, and the flamboyant
floral display of the *Kutaja*,—by this subversion of relation he
laughed (thinking) that even the low-born strikes at an opening’.
(?)—(23)


