+++
title = "035 स्वे स्वे"

+++
The King has been created as the protector of people intent upon their
duties; so that if the King fails to protect those who are engaged in
their duties, he incurs sin: on the other hand, if those who have
swerved from their duty happen to be attacked by some person, this would
not entail any grievous offence on the part of the King. This is what is
meant by the phrase ‘*respective duties*’

Or, the passage may he construed as containing a negative particle
prefixed to the term ‘*niviṣṭānām*’, which is to be read as
‘*a-niviṣṭanam*’, ‘*not conversant*.’ The meaning in this case would be
that ‘the king shall not adopt a hostile attitude towards those persons
who are not conversant with their duties through the scriptures or
through the advice of friends and others’.

The term ‘caste’ has been added for the purpose of securing protection
for women and children also,—these not belonging to any ‘order.’

In that case why should the orders have been mentioned?”

It is for the purpose of indicating their predominance that they have
been separately mentioned; the expression being analogous to such
expressions us ‘*Brāhmaṇa-Vāśiṣṭha* (the Brāhmaṇas and *those of the
race of Vaśiṣṭha*, where the latter, though included among ‘Brāhmaṇas’
are mentioned separately with a view to indicate their importance).

Or, the particular form of the expression may have been adopted for the
purpose of indicating the motive (of protection); the sense being that
they should be protected in such a way that they do not deviate from
their duties in the shape of proceeding from stage to stage, saying of
the Twilight Prayers and so forth; in the performance of their ordinary
duties they shall not be permitted to be struck with a stick etc. by
other people, for if this protection were not vouchsafed, there would be
no end to troubles and difficulties. This is the ‘protection’ that is
meant here.

Nor should people be allowed to interfere with the fulfilment of such
caste-duties as the saying of the Twilight Prayers and the like. Thus a
twofold duty rests upon the King; hence the mention of both ‘castes’ and
‘orders.’

This is what is meant by the words of Gautama—‘He shall protect
according to Law, the castes and orders’ (11-9).—(35).


