+++
title = "043 त्रैविद्येभ्यस् त्रयीम्"

+++
If we read ‘*vidyām*’ with the Accusative ending (instead of ‘*vidyāt*’,
the Injunctive verb), it will have to be construed with ‘*Adhigacchet*’,
‘shall learn’ (of verse 39).

In as much as it is laid down that the King is to be anointed only after
he has passed through the stage of studentship, during which the Vedas
will have been already learnt,—the present injunction is to be taken as
pertaining to his continuing his study.

‘*The three-fold science*’ is that science which has three component
parts; and he who learns this is said to be ‘versed in the three-fold
science’;—from these he shall learn the ‘*Triad*’,—*i.e*., the three
Vedas, the Ṛk. and the rest. That is, in all doubtful matters, he shall
decide with the help of the Vedas; and he shall discuss the exact
meaning of Vedic texts with the said learned persons; end he ahull not
disregard knotty points thinking himself to be a powerful King and hence
influenced by pride and haughtiness.

‘*Also the Science of Government*’;—the science relating to ‘*daṇḍa*’,
and ‘*daṇḍa*’ is *ruling*, *governing*; that whereby enemies as also
people inhabiting his own kingdom, when doing wrong, are kept in check;
and this ‘governance’ consists in the employment of suitable ministers
&c. The ‘science’ of this consists of the rules pertaining to it. This
also he shall learn from persons versed in it, and knowing the works of
Cāṇakya and other writers.

‘*Ancient*’;—this is purely eulogistic.

Though with the help of the Science of Government alone he may be enable
to know the entire world, yet, in as much as that science is based upon
induction, and the Science of Reasoning serves the purpose of bringing
intelligence to the dull and corroboration to the intelligent,—it is
necessary to supplement the said science with the Science of Reasoning,
as also the Science of Politics and so forth; so also the Science of the
Soul.

Or the terms ‘*ānvīkṣikī*’ and ‘*ātmavidyā*’ may be construed together;
the meaning being—‘that Science of Reasoning which is beneficial to
one’s self’;—that he should learn; as it is only such beneficial science
that can be useful to him, in subjugating evil habits, misfortunes and
mental disturbances. As for the Science of Reasoning propounded by the
*Buddhas, the Carvākas* and other atheists, they cannot be of much use
to him; on the contrary, they are likely to shake his faith, if he does
not happen to be exceptionally intelligent.

When the king learns the Science of Reasoning by itself, then he becomes
capable of employing choice language in hie communications with
envoys;—so that he does not become open to ridicule.

‘*The Art of Commerce*’.—The acquiring of the knowledge of
market-commodities, and the knowledge of trade-methods, with the help of
Bṛhaspati’s work, constitutes ‘Commerce’: and activity pertaining
thereto constitutes the ‘Art of Commerce’; that ie, learning the
theories of commerce and then putting them into practice.

This he shall learn from ‘*experts*’—*i.e*., persons making a living by
trade; these alone are ‘experts’ in matters relating to commerce.

The term ‘*from experts*’ may be construd (construed?) with the two
preceding terms (‘Science of Reasoning’ and ‘Science of Soul’) also; so
that we get at the meaning that all these three are to be learnt from
men expert in them.—(43)


