+++
title = "049 द्वयोर् अप्य्"

+++
It has been said that Greediness is at the root of the set of vices born
of love of pleasure; ‘love of pleasure’ consists in hankering after the
objects of enjoyment; and ‘hankering,’ ‘desire,’ ‘greediness’ are
synonymous.

“But how can greediness be the root of the set of vices arising from
Anger, on the basis of which it is said that *both these sets arise out
of that*?”

Our answer is as follows:—What is meant is not that the two sets of
vices have Greediness for their cause, but that Greediness is equal to
the two sets of vices;—the sense being that greediness alone by
itself—even when appearing in a man free from the vices,—produces all
those evils which all the said vices produce; to which end we have the
assertion—‘greediness -destroys all good qualities.’ It is in this sense
that we have the figurative assertion that ‘*both these sets arise out
of that*.’ If there were no Greediness, how could there appear results
similar to those of greediness? In fact, it is the defect in the cause
that indicates the defect in the effect; hence, if there is any evil in
the vices, appearing as the effects of greediness, it follows that there
is a like evil in the cause also.

Or, the meaning may be that as a rule it is only the greedy person who
becomes addicted to Tale-bearing and other shunable acts. Other persons,
even in small matters, become appeased even by slight entreaties. And it
is this that is spoken of figuratively by describing the two sets of
vices as arising out of greediness.—(49.)


