+++
title = "052 सप्तकस्याऽस्य वर्गस्य"

+++
Between Drinking and Gambling, Drinking is the more serious; because
this entails loss of consciousness; by it the unmaddened man becomes
maddened, the living man becomes dead, the man exposes his private
parts, loses his friends, is abandoned by good men and becomes
associated with bad persons; becomes addicted to singing and other
vices, shamelessly gives out bis love and other secrets; the respected
man becomes an object of obloquy, even the otherwise serious man becomes
liable to talk at random, when suffering from intoxication. Such are the
evil effects of Drinking. In the case of Gambling on the other hand, the
man who knows the art of gambling always wins, and also for one who does
not know the art there is only partial loss.

Between Woman and Gambling, the vice of Gambling is more serious. In
Gambling what is won by the man becomes poison for himself; winning
always gives rise to enmities, since it is only loss that is common to
several people; it also leads to the loss of what may have been already
enjoyed; then again, on account of the checking of the calls of nature,
the body becomes dull and a breeding-ground of disease; so that even
Blight causes become productive of much pain; (such is the spirit of
gambling that) even at the death of his mother the man keeps on his
gambling; even when he has attained success, he cannot be drawn away
from it even by bis well-wishers; he ceases to trust even such persons
as avoid other people’s belongings like heated iron; he neglects to give
food and other things to persons that are hungry and in straitened
circumstances; even though endowed with all estimable qualities, he
comes to be despised, as a blade of grass. Such are the evils of
gambling. In the vice connected with woman on the other hand, there is
this good that the man obtains children, enjoys excellent dinners and
nice articles of toilet; so that he secures wealth as well as some
virtue. Further, it is possible to employ women on state-business, and
also for the purpose of rendering people open to stigma and censure.

Between Woman and Hunting, the vice in connection with women is more
serious. Under its influence, the King neglects his business; becoming
addicted to women, he acquires distaste for state-business, he wastes
time and loses in virtue, becomes addicted to the evils of drinking as
also to lying and other pernicious habits. In Hunting on the other hand,
there is physical exercise, a lessening of the humours of bile and
phlegm, reduction of obesity, markmanship in ariming (aiming?) at moving
as well as standing targets, also practice of hitting; the king also
aquires a degree of alertness and cultivates the acquaintance of the
village-folk.

Thus in the set of four vices proceeding from love of pleasure, that
which precedes is more abominable than that which follows.

In the set born of anger also, assaulting is beset with evils, and is
followed by addiction to lying and other evil habits. Between Assaulting
and Cruelty of speech, Assaulting is more serious. In the case of
assault, making up becomes impossible, while in the case of cruel speech
the fire of auger and hatred is capable of being appeased by the
subsequent bestowals of gifts and honour.

Between cruel speech and misappropriation of property, cruel speech is
the more serious. Even high-minded persons become afflicted and
perturbed in mind by cruel speech. To this effect we have the following
saying:—

‘Even a powerful sword, or a black dart, entering the bone may make the
body free from pain, when removed, but words never disappear from the
heart; that which is pierced by an arrow grows again; the forest cut off
by the axe again flourishes; but that which is wounded by rough and
indecent speech never flourishes again’.

Misappropriation of property on the other hand is looked upon as an
effect of ill-luck and as such high-minded people donot feel keenly
about it.

Thus it is shown that in these two sets the preceding vice is more
serious than the succeeding one.—(52)


