+++
title = "054 मौलाञ् शास्त्रविदः"

+++
‘*Of respectable status*’;—hereditary servants of the king, possessed of
many children, and relations and much wealth, openly possessing vast
numbers of cattle and landed property, inhabitants of the kingdom.
‘*Mūla*’ is *status*; and those possessed of status are ‘*maula*’.

‘*Versed in law*’;—‘*śāstra*’ is *law, ordinance*; the law regulating
the conduct of servants; hence the term indicates other qualifications
also; such as—intelligent, of firm resolve, capable of much hard labour,
clever, eloquent, strong, respectable, endowed with courage and energy,
able to bear hardships, pure, liberal, equipped with estimable
character, free from both tardiness and fickleness, loved by men, not
prone to making enemies.

The term ‘*śūra*’, ‘*of heroic temperament*’, indicates one who, in his
zeal for the king’s work, takes no account of his body, life, children
or wealth, and also also not afraid of death, ever ready for battle, and
though alone, he is ever ready to engage in a fight with many
persons,—capable of striking hard, possessed of strength.

‘*Experienced in business*’;—this indicates the fact of their having
seen much work; those who have actually fought with the sword, who have
successfully accomplished their duties, who have had previous experience
in ministerial work.

‘*Born of noble families*;’—when people are moved by considerations of
their noble family, they desist from improper acts.

‘*Ministers*’— assistants.

These should always remain at the king’s side.

‘*Seven or eight*’—This is a restrictive rule; fewer than these are
likely to combine,—and this would render the king’s consultations
one-sided. On the other hand, if they are too many, there is likely to
be great diversities of opinion. Hence only seven or eight ministers are
to be appointed.

‘*Thoroughly tested*”—This refers to tests relative to (*a*) virtue,
(*b*) wealth, (*c*) love and (*d*) fear. For instance, (*a*) The Priest,
under the pretext of having been reprimanded in his work, by the king,
should approach each of the ministers with large presents sent through
trustworthy messengers, with proposals purporting to bring about the
king’s ruin, saying—‘this proposal has been approved by all the
ministers, how does it appear to you?’—If the minister thus approached,
repudiates the suggestion, he has been ‘tested with the test of
virtue.’—(*b*) The army—commander, under a similar pretext of having
been reprimanded, may approach one of the ministers with large presents
sent through trusted messengers, suggesting proposals for bringing about
the king’s ruin, saying—‘this has been approved by all ministers, what
do you think of it?’—If the minister should repudiate the suggestion, he
becomes ‘tested with the test of wealth.’ (*c*) A female ascetic who is
trusted in the king’s harem, shall approach each of the ministers,
saying—‘such and such a queen is in love with you and has made
arrangements for meeting you.’ If the man repudiates the suggestion, he
becomes ‘tested with the test of love.’—(*d*) Some persons, urged by the
king himself, should give out the rumour that ‘the king is being killed
by certain ministers who have made a combination against him’; having
heard this numour (rumour?), a trusted man in the priest’s employ should
suggest to the ministers the following plan—‘on hearing this rumour the
king is going to punish you’; one of these men, having previously
entered into the plan, should approach each of the ministers and urge
them to activity; the ministers who repudiate this suggestion become
‘tested with the test of fear.’

Or, he shall appoint such ministers of finance as are ‘*maula*’ *i.e*.,
capable of collecting and guarding and rightly spending wealth; that is,
those who collect wealth from the villages, and carefully keep and
rightly spend what has been collected. The meaning thus is that he shall
appoint such finance ministers as are experts in money-matters.—‘*Versed
in lavs*’— the councillors that he appoints should be learned.—The
army-commanders that he appoints should be ‘*of heroic temperament*.’
‘*Experienced*’ and the other epithets qualify each of those mentioned
above.

Some people hold that the ‘testing’ of ministers, in the manner related
above, is not the right thing to do; they hold that such testing may
actually produce unfaithful feelings in the minds of the ministers.
Hence some other faithful woman (than the queen herself) should be
employed (in the test); and the intrigue too should he proposed against
some other person than the King himself.—(54)


