+++
title = "056 तैः सार्धम्"

+++
With the aforesaid councillors and finance-ministers he shall discuss
the ‘*ordinary business*’— what may not be of a very confidential
nature—‘*relating to peace and war*’; he shall consider *peace and war*;
he shall consider the pros and cons of both sides of the question as to
whether on a certain occasion peace or war would be the right course to
adopt. But the actual decision he should take himself; so that he may
not appear to have been guided by other persons.

He should also discuss the ‘*state*’; this is fourfold, consisting of
Army, Treasure, City and Kingdom. Of these the ‘*Army*’ consists in
Elephants, Horses, Chariots and Footsoldiers; and he shall discuss such
things relating to them as maintenance, protection, and the appointment
of proper commanders as regards the *Treasury*, it should abound in gold
and silver in large quantities, which should not be spent; the cardinal
parts of the Treasury shall never be expended; nor should payments to
servants be delayed;—as regards the *Kingdom*, which is the same as
*country*, it should be maintained intact against encroachment by
others, by the careful looking after of rivers and trees and cattle, the
building of protective works against possible attacks by enemies; it
should not be allowed to depend entirely on rain, and in times of
distress special penalties and taxes shall be levied (?);—as regards the
*City*, the methods of guarding it are going to be described under 7.75.

Or, ‘*sthāna*’, ‘*state*’, may mean not deviating from its own position.

Similarly he shall also discuss the ‘*sources of revenue*’—such as
agriculture, pastures, barriers, trade, fines and so forth.

‘*Means of protection*’,— of the king’s own kingdom, as going to be
described later on.

‘*Consolidation of what has been acquired*’;—the honouring of learned
and pious men and the continuance of bounties to them, the granting of
fresh bounties; and the removal of all restraints; merciful treatment of
the poor and the diseased; the instituting of fresh public sports and
rejoicings and the continnance (continuance?) of those already in vogue.
He shall put a stop to all abuses regarding the Treasury and judicial
procedure, and introduce sounder methods of work. If there is some
improper act done by others he shall stop it; but he shall not interfere
with any righteons (righteous?) act that may be done by others.

In this manner ‘*State*’ and the rest shall be discussed.—(56).


