+++
title = "085 समम् अब्राह्मणे"

+++
*Objection*:—“As a matter of fact, it has been laid down in the present
context that gifts should be made to *Brāhmaṇas* (82); and before this
also (under 3.96) it has been declared that gifts should be made ‘to a
Brāhmaṇa who knows the real meaning of the Veda.’ Then again, it cannot
be reasonable to accept the words of the text in the literal sense—that
the various kinds of gifts actually bring about the rewards in the
manner stated. For instance, of what sort is the *equableness* (between
the *gift* and the reward accruing thence, to the giver)? Is it in (*a*)
kind, or (*b*) quantity, or (*c*) utility? If it be held to be in
*kind*, then, in a case where, on the occasion of drinking a medicinal
drug, the patient makes a gift of those drags (?) to temple-worshippers,
the gift would be conducive to pain. Because medicinal drugs as a rule
are bitter, hot and pungent and tend to move the bowels. If, again the
‘equableness’ meant were in regard to *quantity*,—and there also the
equality were only in *quantity*, irrespective of the character of the
*substance*,—then a gift of *gold* might bring, as its reward, an equal
quantity of *copper*, or some such things as a clod of earth or a piece
of wood and the like. If again, the ‘equableness’ meant were both in
regard to *kind* and *quantity*, then also there would be the same
difficulties as those just pointed out. If lastly, the ‘equableness’
meant were in regard to *utility*,—then also, if the use also were of
the same kind, in that case, the use of the medicinal drugs consisting
in the curing a certain disease,—if the reward were to be of the same
kind, then it would be as good as nonexistent, if the man did not happen
to suffer from the same disease; so that the gift of those drugs would
have to make the giver subject to that disease again, or some other
disease of the same degree of seriousness. For these reasons, the
declarations contained in the present verse should not be regarded as
distinct sentences standing by themselves. Just as in the case of the
Vedic declarations—‘The *Nivīta* form is for human beings end the
*Upavīta* for divine beings; so that when the man adopts the *Upavīta*
form, he takes upon himself a mark of the gods’,—what is said in regard
to the *Nivīta* and the rest is not taken as distinct from what is said
regarding the adopting of the *Upavīta* form.”

The answer to the above is as follows:—In the present text we do not.
find any verb in any of the sentences, every one of which, therefore,
stands on the same footing. If it is a commendatory description, then
this can apply only to the statement ‘that to the man learned in the
Veda, endless.’ If again, it is an Injunction, then all the sentences
should be regarded as equally injunctive; there is nothing to indicate
that any one of them is subservient to any other. In the case of the
passage regarding the ‘*Nivīta*’ &c; on the other hand, we find a verb
in the term ‘*upavyayate*’ (‘adopts the *upavīta* form’); so that the
sentence containing it fulfilling the conditions of an Injunctive
sentence, it is only right that the others should be taken as
subservient to it.

As for the argument that no gifts to a Non-Brāhmaṇa can be
possible,—this must be due to the objector having forgotten that gifts
to the poor and helpless of all castes have been enjoined. In fact it is
only in regard to gifts to be made by Kings to *Brāhmaṇas* that we have
the sentences in the present verse.

As regards the argument that “there is no possibility of rewards
accruing in the manner stated in the text, on account of all the various
methods indicated bring, open to objection,”—our answer is as
follows;—The mode of expression adopted here is that of ordinary
parlance. In ordinary parlance, what is not *very* *good* is called
‘equable’; *e*. *g*. in such expressions as ‘the Saktu contains an
equable supply of salt.’ As for the reward being ‘*two-fold?*, the
two-foldness meant is in regard to *utility*; the meaning bring that the
reward is doubly as useful as the original gift. It is not meant either
that the same *kind* of substance is obtained in return, or that the
*utility* is of the same kind; all that is meant is that the degree of
*happiness* produced is twice as much. Further, as a matter of fact, the
verse is not meant to be an ‘injunction of rewards’; so that there is no
room for the raising of any such questions as to whether it is the
*same* *substance*, or another substance, that is obtained in reward.
Specially as in cases where no rewards ore mentioned, the attainment of
Heaven is always regarded as the reward. Then again, in connection with
the giving of sesamum, the obtaining of children has been declared to be
the reward; and certainly in such a case there can be no possibility of
the reward being of the same *kind* as the gift. Thus all that is meant
here, and also in the subsequent passages, is that the excellence of the
recipient adds to the excellence of the gift. This is exactly what is
emphasised in the next verse.

In the term ‘*brāhmaṇa—bruva*’ (‘nominal Brāhmaṇa’)—the particle
‘*bruva*’ has a derogatory sense; it staṇḍs for one who is Brāhmaṇa by
caste only, and is wholly devoid of learning and other qualities.

‘*Teacher*’—the Initiator.

‘*A person thoroughly learned in the Veda*,’—one who has, by learning
and study, got to the end of the Veda.—(85)


