+++
title = "089 आहवेषु मिथो"

+++
‘*Āhava*’ is that where heroes are *challenged* by one another to fight,
*i.e*., the battle; vying with one another and ‘*seeking to slay each
other*’;—‘*fighting*’— striking —‘*with great energy*’—to the utmost of
their power. It is on account of metrical exigencies that in place of
‘*parayā*’ (as qualifying ‘*śaktyā*’) we have the form ‘*param*’.

‘*Without turning back*’;—this is to be construed with
‘*fighting*’;—*proceed to heaven*.’

*Objection*—“As a matter of fact, the action taken by kings is
instigated by a love for territorial expansion; so that an ordinary
physical reward being possible, why should Heaven be mentioned as the
reward?”

Heaven is mentioned as the reward in connection with the observance of
the rules of war going to be described; for the observance of these
rules there can be no other motive. Even the king who has renounced his
kingdom may observe the rules laid down in the next and following
verses, and by surrendering to the powerful enemy he would become
entitled to the trancendental reward (Heaven; there being no possibility
of his winning any territories). Or again, when a king, on suffering
defeat in battle, enters the fray (in sheer desperation), this act can
only lead to Heaven. And on the strength of the present verse, such
desperate fighting could not fall within the purview of the prohibition
of self-immolation.

‘*Kings*’—Rulers of provinces; not those under them; as the action of
these latter is prompted by the interest of their masters and not by any
interest of their own; under the circumstances, how could there be any
rewards for them? In fact, their case is analogous to that of the
Priests whose services have been secured by means of a stipulation
regarding fees; so that in the case of the king’s underlings also, in as
much as their service has been secured by means of wages, how could
there be any reward in the shape of Heaven or the like?

“But under 5-97, it has been declared without any reservation that the
sacrifice is immediately accomplished for the *Kṣatriya* who is killed
by means of uplifted weapons, in due accordance with the duties of the
Kṣatriya; and again—‘those two persons pierce through the solar orb—the
Renunciate is meditation and the hero killed in the forefront of
battle’;—further, in the Mahābhārata, it has been declared that Heaven
is attained even by those who witness the battle. There are Vedic texts
indicative of the same fact; *e.g*., ‘Those brave men who fight in
battles and give up their bodies there, as also those who pay a thousand
as the sacrificial fee, go to the Gods,’—which shows that great rewards
accrue to those sacrificers who pay a thousand as sacrificial fees,—‘as
also those brave persons who give up their lives in battle’. Further,
the text speaks of ‘those who fight,’ and not ‘those who have sold
themselves for dying (for others);’ specially as there is no such
stipulation made at the time that the man’s services are engaged. In the
case of the officiating priests, the *Hotṛ*, the *Udgātṛ* and the rest,
their appointment is for the express purpose of performing those
priestly duties that are indicated by their titles. From all this it
follows that even in the case of a map dying in serving his master,
there is transcendental reward. Nor is there any such hard and fast rale
as that there can be no reward in the case of an act prompted by the
purposes of another man. In fact the slayer of a Brāhmaṇa becomes
purified by bathing at the Final Bath of the *Aśvamedha* sacrifice,
where he is not the performer of the sacrifice.”

The answer to the above is as follows:—As a matter of fact, the giving
up of his life by the king for the benefit of his people is actually
conducive to merit. As regards what has been said regarding the losing
of one’s life in battle being tantamount to the accomplishment of a
sacrifice,—this must refer to the man whose services have been engaged
on a salary and who, not being his own master, enters the battle simply
on the word of command to ‘march forward’. This is the person meant by
the expression ‘who is killed in the fore-front of battle.’

Or, the ‘piercing of the solar orb’ by the man fighting in battle would
mean only *being saved from hell*. In a case where a king’s realm is
attacked and pillaged by another king, and his people are being
massacred, if the former undertakes to fight against him and loses his
life in the fray, this would be conducive to merit. If he does not
fight, he falls into ‘blind darkness’, which means *Hell*, on account of
the total absence of light there. What the ‘piercing of the solar orb’
means is that the man reaches the regions beyond the solar regions;
*i.e*., he does not fall downwards. When a man has accepted service on
pay, under a master, if he fails tonight for his master in battle, and
abandons him, his fall into hell is certain. On the other hand, if the
man has fought his master’s battle and has become free from the debt of
the wages he has received from him,—if he is not bowed down by his
sins,—it is only natural that he should attain heaven, by virtue of his
own meritorious acts. It is in view of this that it has been declared
that ‘his sacrifice becomes immediately accomplished’. Thus also the
passage in the Mahābhārata becomes reconciled, where it is said that
persons who have accepted service in the army attain heaven. As for the
mention of Heaven being attained by persons ‘witnessing the battle’,
this must be regarded as a commendatory exaggeration.

Or, the meaning of all this may be that, there being many means of
livelihood, living by military service is sure to lead to heaven.

As regards the argument that it is not for dying that the men are
engaged in military service,—in reality when soldiers are paid their
wages, it is for no other purpose than for fighting; specially as no
other purpose has been mentioned. The men are engaged by the master with
the view that ‘they shall be ready for all kinds of work and shall help
me in all my undertakings.’ So that when a war breaks out, it becomes
their duty to do everything for their master, even up to the giving up
of the body; and thus alone is he able to repay his master. When,
however, there is no war, if the servant happens to die, then he dies a
servant (and not one freed from bondage); as the repayment of his debt
is accomplished only if he accomplishes some purpose of his master,
similar to that for which he has been engaged. as for the texts quoted
as indicating the attainment of heaven by men dying in battle,—these
also become reconciled in the above manner.

What has been mid regarding the murderer becoming freed from sins by
bathing at the Final Bath of the *Aśvamedha* is accepted on the strength
of the direct assertion to that effect, contained in such texts
as—‘Hence on their association etc. etc.’; while in the present instance
going upward is stated to be the result of fighting;—and this
constitutes a difference between the two cases (which, thus, cannot be
regarded as analogous).—(89)


