+++
title = "104 अमाययैव वर्तेत"

+++
‘*Māyā*’, ‘*guile*’, is Treachery; with that he shall never behave; as
by doing so, he would not be trustworthy. Nor shall he try to alienate
the subjects of other kings, until their inclinations have been
ascertained. But ‘*the guiles employed by his enemies he shall fathom*’
and understand in their true character; and having found out the guiles,
he should proceed to win over the enemy’s men.

The *modus operandi* of this is fourfold—as through (*a*) the angry,
(*b*) he covetous, (*c*). the frightened and (*d*) the ill-treated.

(*a*) When a man has done some artistic work, or some one has done
something beneficial to the king,—such persona are either (1) cheated,
or (2) presented with reward, or (3) ill-treated, and at this other
artists and helpers also become angry—at the thought that—‘this king
does not appreciate our art or help’. Such persons an fit for being
approached for alienation. Similarly when a person, hitherto honoured
and treated with affection, comes to fall off from honour and office,
his friends and relations banished, himself imprisoned along with his
family, his entire property confiscated,—and another person with similar
qualifications becomes honoured in his place,—then the former and others
like him constitute the ‘*angry*’.

(*b*) When a wicked act has been done by some person, and he has been
punished, other persons, who have committed the same offence are in
constant dread of that same punishment; similarly persons in high
office, who may have failed in their duty, and others in like position
constitute the ‘*frightened*’ set.

(*c*) The poverty-stricken, the miserly, the profligate, the man
immersed in debt and so forth constitute the ‘*covetous*’ set.

(*d*) When the Self-respecting person, seeking honour at the bunds of
the King’s enemy, is ‘on the contrary) struck by him, he, being of a
fiery temper and brave, becomes highly incensed at such treatment;—such
persons constitute the ‘*ill-treated*’ set.

The King shall attempt the alienation of all such persons from the other
King; and at the same time he shall take care regarding similar people
on his own side.—(104)


