+++
title = "164 स्वयङ्कृतश् च"

+++
The ‘season’ for the king himself declaring war is that time when he is
full of confidence in his own strength and is imbued with courage for
reducing his enemy, when his subjects are united and prosperous, fully
endowed with the rewards of agriculture and other kinds of business, and
ready to deprive the enemy of all this business,—and when the enemy’s
subjects are in reduced circumstances and covetous, and as such easily
capable of being alienated from him and won over to the other side,—this
is the ‘season’ for war to be waged by the king himself. And it is ‘out
of season’ when conditions are the reverse of this.

Further, war is also waged, by reason of some wrong inflicted on one’s
ally. If the enemy has done some injury to his ally, then, taking this
into consideration, the king shall wage war, even though it be out of
season. Though he himself may be an ally of the injured king only in the
sense that he is the neighbour of the king who has inflicted the wrong
(and from whom he himself might expert an attack), yet, with the help of
the ally (whose injury he is going to avenge) he would be able to check
that enemy. It is true that the enemy’s neighbour is his ally; but the
enemy’s enemy has his realm further removed.

Another reading is ‘*mitreṇa caivāpdkṛte*’; which means that if the king
happens to be attacked by his ally, he may wage this war even out of
season.

The two kinds of war thus are—(l) that waged for one’s own sake, and (2)
that waged for the sake of the ally; or one kind of war is that which is
prompted by one’s own prosperity, and another kind is that which is
waged when one has been wronged by his ally and is on that account, in
trouble.—(164)


