+++
title = "182 मार्गशीर्षे शुभे"

+++
When he is going to undertake an expedition involving a campaign that
might be a long one, in consideration of his own forces and also in that
of the king against whom he is marching,—he shall march against the
hostile kingdom in the month of *Mārgaśīrṣa*, when his forces are fully
equipped and when his stores are fully replenished with the
autumn-harvest. Starting about this time, he can easily carry with him
the autumn-fruits garnered in the house and is cheered by the prospects
of the spring-harvest. The time is quite fit for the work of laying
siege to fortresses and to forth; and the path also is not beset with
deviations and diversion due to the overgrowth of grasses or the
over-flowing of risers; and the season is neither too hot nor too cold.
At any other time of the year food-grains, even though sufficient,
cannot be of sufficiently diverse quality, the season of the three
harvests being far off; so that the enemy would be likely to take
shelter under a powerful king, which would lead to the unnecessary
expenditure of the stock of food-grains of both parties, and the
attacking king’s own forces also would become weakened.

If however the king is desirous only of inflicting some injury on the
enemy’s territory, or when the expedition is expected to take a short
time, and his force is sufficiently strong, then he may start also
during the months of *Phālguṇa* and *Caitra*, specially against a
country which is rich in spring-harvests. At this time of the year also,
he can obtain fodder and at the same time inflict an injury upon the
other party, by destroying the crops standing in the fields.

‘*According to the condition of his forces*’;—he should regulate his
marches according to the strength of his army.—(182)


