+++
title = "185 संशोध्य त्रिविधम्"

+++
**(verses 7.184-185)**

‘*At the base*’—in his own kingdom and in his own fort—he shall
establish a rear-guard by way of ‘*arrangement*’ *i.e*., as a
precautionary measure; that is, he shall supply the fort with a large
supply of food-grains &c. and with fitted up machines and defences and
ditches &c. The kingdom also he shall leave protected by companies of
soldiers. Having made the Commander thoroughly contented by means of
honours and presents, he shall appoint him in charge of outposts in his
rear along the boundaries of his territory; and a fully-equipped army
shall be left under him, within his own territories.

‘*Those pertaining to the expedition*’—*i.e*., the preparations for the
expedition, consisting in providing weapons of offence and defence for
the elephant—corps, the cavalry and other branches of the army.

‘*Duly*’—*i.e*. according to the instructions contained in works dealing
with the art of war.

‘*Basis*’—f oot-hold; from where the temper of the people other than his
enemies might be duly watched;—having ‘secured’—made his own—such a
ground.

For the purpose of learning the condition of things in the enemy’s
kingdom, having ‘*deputed*’— appointed—spies; for the purpose of finding
out whether the enemy has began to get together his forces, or to rouse
his opponent’s circle to rebellion, or to take shelter with a neutral or
indifferent king; and he should also seek to ascertain whether the enemy
is going to check his very first advance directly, or to cut off his
communications, and all other allied matters.—(184)

‘*Three kinds of roads*’—*i.e*., those passing (1) through the open
country, (2) through marshy ground, and (3) through forests. Some people
read ‘*vana*’ is place of ‘*āṭavika*’, and thus make up the ‘three’.
Others again describe the ‘*three kinds of roads*’ as (1) high, (2) low
and (3) level.

‘*Having cleared*’; — cutting off the trees, thickets and creepers
obstructing the path, and levelling the undulations of the ground,
preparing fords in rivers and ravines, destroying the wild animals
besetting the path, winning over the path-finders to his side, and
getting together supplies of food and fodder &c.

‘*Six-fold force*’— according to some the six factors are—(l) Elephants,
(2) horses, (3) chariots and (4) footsoldiers—these four constituting
the ‘army’—and (5) Treasury and (6) Mechanics. Others read ‘fixing of
rates’ in place of ‘treasury’. According to others again, the six
factors are—(1) the hereditary soldiers of the king, (2) mercenaries,
(3) groups, (4) friendly (5) unfriendly and (6) foresters.

‘*In the manner prescribed for warfare*’;—‘*Sāmparāyikam*’ means
*pertaining to* ‘*samparaya*’ or *tear*;—*i.e*., that which has been
laid down for the purpose of war; in that manner,—*i.e*., in the manner
prescribed for advancing against a fort,—he shall advance against the
enemy.

The disposition of the army shall be in accordance with the nature of
the ground; palisades being set of with dry or living pillars, with
several openings, and made of sticks, planks and branches of trees and
so forth. Special care has to be taken regarding this daring the time
that the army is on the march.—(185)


