+++
title = "186 शत्रुसेविनि मित्रे"

+++
‘Who is serving his enemy secretly,’—hidden;—against such an ‘*ally*’,
as also against ‘*one who has gone away and returned*’—‘*he shall be
very much on guard*; he shall be careful, watchful, in regard to them;
*i.e*. he shall not trust them. Because such a person is ‘*the more
dangerous enemy*’—worse than one who is openly hostile to him.

The use of the epithets ‘*very much on guard*’ and ‘*more dangerous*’
implies that the person who has gone over to the other side and returned
again should not be received back.

Such a person is of four kinds:—(1) He who has gone away for some
reason, and comes back for some reason contrary to the reason for which
he had gone, e.g. he went away on account of some defect in his chief,
and comes back on having thought of his good qualities; (2) he who has
come back for some reason; from among these the person who comes back
for some reason shall be dismissed, as being fickle-minded and careless
in his acts, and hence no confidence can be reposed in him;—(3) he who
has gone for some reason, and returns also for the same reason; *e.g*.
he goes on account of some bad quality of his chief, and returns also on
account of some bad quality in his new chief; such a person shall be
received with honour, and if his return is found to be due to his
attachment to the former chief, he shall be taken back; (4) on the other
hand, if he be found to have been deputed by the enemy of his chief with
a view to cause some injury to his former chief, then he shall not be
taken back.—(186)

When the king has started on his expedition against a hostile kingdom.—


