+++
title = "190 गुल्मांश् च"

+++
‘*Pickets*’—troops of men; some of them supplied with conches and drums,
while others are not so supplied. These shall be stationed at those
points where if any mishap were to occur, it would lead to grave peril.

The qualifications of these men are now stated—

(*a*) ‘*Reliable*’; ‘*āpta*’ is a *relative*, and ‘reliable servants’
are as good as relatives.

(*b*) ‘*With whom signals have been arranged*.’—with whom signs for
communication have been fixed upon; such as—‘when the battle has begun,
when you hear the sound of conches, trumpets, drums and other
instruments, in such and such a way, then you shall understand that
there are signs of wavering and retreat, and then you shall do such and
such an act’,—or ‘when the flag is taken down, or hoisted up, you shall
stand apart from one another; if it is hoisted in this way you shall
charge in a mass; you shall turn back, when it is raised in such and
such fashion’.

(*c*) ‘*Experts in standing* *firm*’,—who are determined to stand
together in proper formation even when charged by the canons of the
enemy attacking them in dense masses; ‘*as also in charging*’—*i.e*.,
while not quite expert in pursuing the fleeing enemy, they are adepts in
charging *en masse* into the thickest of the enemy and engaging in
fierce combat his rear-guard and taking captives hundreds of those
trying to run away.

(*d*) ‘*Fearless*’—hence prone to spreading themselves and yet operating
in combination.

(*e*) ‘*Loyal*’—identifying themselves entirely with the interests of
their chief.

In this fashion he shall establish several pickets ‘*on all
sides*’—*i.e*. on three sides—extending to two miles each way; bat the
position of these shall be altered everyday. When the fears of the chief
are allayed by the alertness of these, his people gain confidence in
him. And the king shall address the following words to his men—‘In as
much as, at the end of the war, presents, honours and appreciations
shall be distributed among all, it is the interest of all of you, along
with the ministers, that it be waged in the proper manner,—I am *king*
only in name—in reality all of us are equal sharers in all prosperity
that may come to us,—if we win, we acquire a kingdom, and if we lose we
attain heaven,—it is with this view that all of us have come
together’.—(190)


