+++
title = "191 संहतान् योधयेद्"

+++
If the men do not fight in a close formation, and extend themselves over
a large space,—then, happening to be opposed by a larger force, they are
apt to be overtaken in small detachments and thus, by sheer impact,
become annihilated. For this reason, when the number of.men is small,
they should, be mode to fight in close formation, so that fighting with
mutual support, they do not become completely annihilated; and also when
fighting dose by one another, through mutual rivalry and attachment they
are enabled to fight the stronger enemy.

‘*As he likes*’—as much as he may wish, in view of the end to be
served,—‘*he may extend a large number of* wirn’—*i.e*., make them fight
in small detachments.

If the king thinks that when ordered to fight in small detachments, they
may be struck with fear,—or that fear might arise in their minds on
seeing the larger numbers of the enemy—then he shall array his men in
the form of the ‘*needle*’ described above. The ‘thunderbolt array’ is
that particular form in which the men are divided into three parts—one
in the front, another in the rear and the rest on the two sides (of the
king). In this ‘needle-array’ or ‘thunderbolt-array’ having arrayed his
men, he shall make them do buttle. Of all arrays these two have been
singled out for mention, as these two are best able to sustain a charge
as well as to push home an attack. When he finds these same formations
on the enemy’s side, then he shall resort to the opposite formation.

In the event of both belligerents being equal in number, the particular
formations and their effectiveness shall depend upon the physical
strength, loyalty and efficiency of the men engaged.

The term ‘*shall make to fight*’ implies that the king himself shall
direct the operations from his quarters in a fortress or in some other
comparatively safe spot forming the rear of the army. Says a work on the
subject—‘The king shall go back to a distance of 200 *bows* (1200 feet)
and stay there as the he engage in battle *rear guard*, for the purpose
of rallying the men that may be routed; and in no case shall he be
without such a rearguard’.—(191)


