+++
title = "194 प्रहर्षयेद् बलम्"

+++
‘*Having arrayed his forces*,’ and thereby displayed his strength, he
shall encourage his men with such words as—‘what is there to win? Our
enemies are already as good as defeated by your prowess,’—‘If you win
you gain much wealth, and thereby bring happiness to your dependents and
others; it you are slain in battle, you gain heaven, and pay off the
debt owing to your employer; on the other hand, if you are defeated, you
lose all these three advantages;’ and so forth, addressing them such
words as may be suitable to the occasion.

He shall also ‘*thoroughly test them*’; he shall get some one to address
them such words as—‘Do not submit to the restrictions laid down by the
king,—we could bear all these if the king and the commander exposed
themselves and their relations also to the same danger as ourselves,—the
king under the pretence of keeping the rear-guard, is keeping himself in
a safe place; being a coward he does not wish to enter the fray’ and so
forth. On hearing all this some of the men would reply as follows:—‘It
is not as you say,—this war is our very own,—and for us, who live by the
use of weapons, being killed in battle is a highly desirable end,—not
fleeing from battle is the highest duty of warriors, and the abandoning
of our duty would be a source of sin,—the king also should be guarded by
all means in our power;—when we are done, he shall certainly provide
rest and other favours for us,—in fact, that is why he is staying with
us’;—those who respond thus he shall treat with special consideration.
When they gain a victory, they should be enlogised (eulogised?) and
presented with robes of honour, and their attachment should be
strengthened by means of embraces, decorations and presents.

While they are engaging the enemy, ‘*he shall mart their behaviour*’;
*i.e*., find out how his men are behaving and how his treasury is
faring. Some men are likely to be half-hearted, while others go to it
whole-heartedly,—all this has to be carefully watched, on account of
human nature being extremely fickle; and even those who help generally
do so for some selfish end.

Having tested his men, he shall place the unreliable ones in the midst
of reliable ones, so that they may all reach the enemy’s
stronghold.—(194)

The author proceeds to lay down the means of getting at the enemy’s
stronghold in the next verse.


