+++
title = "205 सर्वङ् कर्मेदम्"

+++
‘*Undertaking*’, action done for the purpose of bringing about a
desirable result,—‘*all this*’ is dependent upon something.

‘*Vidhāna*’, ‘*ordering*’, is that which *ordains*, the effect of
actions. That which *ordains* an act also *qualifies* it;—‘*of Destiny
and of Human Exertion*’,—‘*Destiny*’ consisting in Merit &c., resulting
from previous acts, in the shape of doing what is prescribed and also
what is forbidden. The doing of an act has its motives noticeable in
morality or immorlity. *Says* the *Śṛuti*— “*Vidhi*, (creator)’ Vidhāna
(ordinance) *Niyati* (Destiny), *Svabhāva* (Nature), *Kāla* (Time),
*Brahma*, *Īśvara* (God,) *Karma* (Deed), *Daiva* (Fate), *Bhāgya*
(Luck), *Puṇya* (Merit) *Bhutāntaryoga* (co-operation of Beings)—these
are the synonyms of “*Previous Act*”;—and the *Smṛti* also “*Destiny*
should be understood as what is done by the man himself in his previous
body; and *Human Exertion* is what he does during this life”. From this
it is clear that as between ‘Destiny’ and ‘Human Exertion’, the latter
becomes, after death, the cause of the former.

It is on this ‘effect’ that every undertaking and its result are
‘dependent’. Destiny by itself, apart from Human Exertion, does not
bring about any results; it must need the help of Human Effort; and
Human Effort must need the help of Destiny. If results followed from
mere Destiny, independently of Human Exertion, then it would he possible
for results to accrue to the embryo also; since however there are no
such results, it has to be inferred that results follow from Destiny
only when it is accompanied by Human Exertion; similarly, if Human
Exertion were productive of results, independently by itself,; then all
kinds of results would accrue to all kinds of men. As a matter of fact,
no such thing ever actually happens. Hence it follows that causal
efficiency belongs to both conjointly. So says Vyāsa—‘All human
undertakings are the effects of twofold *Karma*,—Destiny and Human
Exertion; apart from these two there is nothing else.’ (*Mahābhārata*,
*Sauptika-parva*, 2.2); and in the *Samāna-tantra* (?) also—‘Destiny and
Human Exertion maintain the moral and immoral activities of men.’

Those who hold that Destiny is the sole cause of things argue as
follows:—“Destiny is the only cause. As a matter of fact, we find that
idiots, eunuchs, cripples, lame persons and others, though absolutely
unable to put forth any exertion, are still happy; though entirely
helpless, yet they obtain the good results of past acts. On the other
hand, it is often found that persons with enough means at their command,
able-bodied, brave and clever and versed in the scriptures, are unhappy,
even though putting forth all their efforts; and people go on
experiencing gains and losses, brought about Destiny alone,
independently of all efforts of their own. It is only under this theory
that all activities tending to bring about results in the other world
come to have their use; the idea in the mind of the actors being—‘we are
experiencing in this world the results of past deeds and in the other
world we shall experience those of our present deeds’; and it is when
they know this that they engage themselves in meritorious deeds, and it
is on this account that doubts also arise in the minds of people. (In
support of the fatalist’s stand-point) they quote the following
saying—‘I know what is righteous, and yet I do not act up to it; and I
know what is unrighteous, and yet I do not desist from it;; I do exactly
as I am prompted to do by God; apart from Him there is no other guide’.”

On the other hand, those who would depend entirely upon Human Exertion
argue, thus:—“Human Exertion is the sole cause of all activities. It is
only when the man laboriously exerts towards agricultural operations
that he obtains the fruits of cultivation in the shape of good harvest.
To this end it has been declared that—‘In this world, it is only one who
resorts to activity and performs acts that enjoys their results’. Even
when food is there, people do not have their hunger satisfied unless
they actually do the eating; so that it stands to reason that since the
result of the act of eating accrues to the man only after he has done
that act, it should be attributed to the act (and not to any thing
else). It is only thus that all injunctions regarding the doing of acts
become useful. To this end they say—‘The wise man sometimes sets aside
even Destiny itself, just as he keeps off heat and cold and brings on as
well as drives off rain.’”

From all these arguments it follows that causal efficiency belongs to
both, Destiny and Human Exertion; specially as it is found that in the
absence of either of the two, proper results do not appear. In some
cases, one, and in others, the other, happens to be chiefly conducive to
a particular result, and hence comes to be regarded as the cause of that
result. It often happens that human exertion, even though put forth, is
baffled when overpowered by a more powerful Destiny; just as wet fuel,
even though put in fire, does not burn, if the fire is weak. And even if
Destiny be weak, if it is helped by strong human effort, it succeeds in
producing its results; just as even wet fuel burns when put in powerful
fire, and it does not quench the fire. To this end there is the
following saying—‘Destiny, when weak, is set aside by Human Exertion,
and even intelligent effort is baffled by more powerful Destiny.’

It is in view of all this that the Author says —‘*of these two Destiny
is verily incomprehensible*; the term ‘*tu*’ denotes emphasis; the
meaning is that the real character of Destiny cannot be comprehended. It
cannot be even thought of at what time it will bring about its results;
specially as apart from the scriptures, we cannot form any conception of
it, we cannot fathom in what way it comes into existence and how it
operates.

As regards Destiny then, any enquiry concerning it would be futile among
human beings. Hence it is Human exertion, in the form of Action, that is
going to be described, forming, as it does, the subject-mater of the
treatise. And it is only in regard to ‘Human exertion’ that ‘*action is
possible*’. In connection with agricultural operations, it is possible
for us to form some idea, such as—‘I should carry on such and such
operations, by means of such and such appliances, and in this manner I
shall obtain such and such results’. In fact people undertake only that
action of which the beginning, the middle and the end can be perceived.
As regards ‘Destiny’, it is absolutely unthinkable in what manner even
men in trouble should act, until the result is actually perceived. Thus
Destiny bring ‘*incomprehensible*’, it is not necessary \[to devote much
attention to it. It is *human activity* which we can think over and then
do what has to be done; in fact the man who acts in a happazard manner,
without thinking of what he does, always comes to grief.

When the king is equipped with all the three ‘powers’, and endowed with
due exertion and energy, there arises in his mind a keen desire to
conquer other kingdoms; and it is when Human Exertion becomes helped by
Destiny that it accomplishes all his purposes. And towards the final
result it is Destiny that adds to excellence and all the rest of it is
accomplished by Human Exertion alone. In the case of the king who has
set out on conquest, if the enemy happens at the time to be under some
calamity, this is due entirely to Destiny; and in action, it is Human
Exertion that is most effective; so. in fact both stand on the same
footing.

Further, it has been held that “when Human exertion functions,
irrespectively of the ordering of Destiny, then it is with great
difficulty that it leads to success”. This means that if the man puts
forth his efforts when Destiny is against him, then, in regard to all
the eight forms of activity, cither it accomplishes his purpose only
with great difficulty, or it becomes entirely futile. Hence, even though
there be prospect of difficulties, yet no one shall rest satisfied with
simply resigning himself to Destiny.

When, on the other hand, Human Exertion operates in co-operation with
Destiny, then it accomplishes all his purposes—as delineated in the
Vedic texts—without difficulty. Thus whenever Human Exertion functions,
while Destiny is favourable, it accomplishes all his purpose without any
trouble at all. This idea is further confirmed by the following two
verses:—‘In some cases, when the man has put forth his effort in the
field—even though Destiny is against him—it brings him its due
reward;—sometimes the field is as if it were dead, and then all effort
is futile.’ It has often been found that though the man tries again and
again, the result does not accrue if the necessary aid in the form of
favourable Destiny does not come to his rescue.

Then again, ‘even though the man may have his Destiny favourable, yet,
in the absence of Exertion, no field can bear fruits without due Human
Exertion’. In fact it is only when the result has been gained that the
presence of favourable Destiny is inferred. Hence when there is no
Result, it follows that favourable Destiny was absent.

Others have held the view that when it has been found that Destiny has
been duly operative, and yet the result does not appear, this only
indicates that there has been no human exertion in the case; the case
being analogous to that of there being no tree when there is no seed. In
this view, Destiny is held to be represented by the Sun, the Moon and
the other planets, as also by Vāyu, Agni and Apas; and it is set right
by Human Exertion put forth with special care.—(205)


