+++
title = "213 आपदर्थन् धनम्"

+++
The rule here laid down is extremely difficult to follow.

‘*For the sake of trouble*’,—*i.e*., for the purpose of removing
trouble; just as smoke set up for the removal of mosquitoes is said to
be ‘for the sake of mosquitoes’. For that purpose ‘*he shall save
wealth*’; there is no other use for saving wealth; as wealth has been
described as being for the sake of *giving* and *enjoying*. Hence it is
with due consideration of this that the king shall regulate his
expeditions and haltings and the winning over of the men of the other
party.

Even with wealth he shall protect his wife; the mention of the ‘wife’
includes all near relatives.

His own self is to be preserved; and if he cannot preserve himself by
any other way, he shall do it even by giving away all his property, or
even if it become necessary, by giving up his wife; for even after
having abandoned his wife and property, he may take to the vow of
silence and carry on a life of righteousness. Those persons who allow
themselves to perish for the sake of wealth or wife,—for them the wife
or the property serves no useful purpose, either visible or invisible,
because such an act is neither righteous nor unrighteous.

This forsaking of the wife does not apply to young
princes............... (?)

Though this rule has been laid down in the section dealing with the
‘King’s Duties’, yet, since it serves a distinctly useful purpose, it
should be taken as applicable to all persons.

*Objection*: “The king, having acquired a kingdom, and being possessed
of much wealth, shall perform the *Aśvamedha* and other elaborate
sacrifices and enjoy unequalled pleasures; what could the discontented
people do to him (in consideration whereof he should give up the
conquered territory)?”

There is no force in this objetion; even for men possessed of little
wealth, many righteous acts are possible, in the shape of the telling of
beads and so forth. It is only for certain acts of a peculiar character
that wealth is necessary; and under the circumstances stated it would
not be right to displease the people; hence such an act shall not be
done in a hurry.—(213)

And the reason for it is as follows:—


