+++
title = "001 व्यवहारान् दिदृक्षुस्"

+++
**(verses 8.1-2)  
**

*Gautama* (13.26).—‘The king or the judge ora Brāhmaṇa learned in the
scriptures shall examine the witnesses.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.2).—‘Let the king or the minister transact the business
on the bench.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.72).—‘Let the king try causes himself, accompanied by
well-instructed Brāhmaṇas.’

Do. (71.60).—‘Near the Fire, Deities and Brāhmaṇas, he shall raise the
right arm.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.359).—‘Every day, he shall look into cases himself,
surrounded by members of the Assembly.’

Do. (2.1).—‘The king shall try causes, accompanied by learned Brāhmaṇas,
in strict accordance with legal scriptures,—being free from anger and
avarice.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 596).—‘The king, assisted by the minister, free
from all love and hatred, shall carefully look into the causes of
contending parties.’

*Nārada* (Do. p. 599).—‘The king composedly looking into cases himself
obtains bright fame here and reaches the regions of Indra.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.7, 9-13).—‘*Vyavahāra* i s that which, by
discriminating the good from the evil, ministers to the virtues of both
the people and the king, and furthers their interests. The king should
attentively look after law-suits, freeing himself from anger and greed,
according to the dictates of the legal scriptures,—in the company of the
Judge, the Minister, the Brāhmaṇa and the Priest. He should never singly
try cases of two parties, or hear their statement. Neither the wise king
nor the Councillors are to hold a trial in secret.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.85).—‘The King should enter the court modestly,
together with the Brāhmaṇas and the Ministers versed in
state-craft,—with the object of investigating cases.’

*Kātyāyana* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra).—‘The King shall be accompanied by
those permanent members who are experienced, having hereditary
connections, the best of the twice-born, expert in the sacred law and in
the science of polity.’

*Kātyāyaṇa* (Parāśaramādhava--Vyavahāra, p. 17).—‘That place is called
*Dharmādhikaraṇa*, Court, where the truth regarding suits is
investigated in pursuance of the legal scriptures.—The king shall enter
the court after having finished all his daily duties, and after having
duly honoured, with flowers and ornaments, his preceptor, astrologers,
physicians, deities, Brāhmaṇas and Priests.’

Do. (Vīramitrodaya-Vyavahāra, p. 14).—‘If the King looks into lawsuits,
with the assistance of the Judge, the Minister, the Brāhmaṇa and the
Priest, he attains heaven.’

Do. (Vyavahāratattva, p. 2).—‘Accompanied by the Judge, the Minister,
the Brāhmaṇa and Priest, the King himself shall determine their victory
or defeat.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.4-5).—‘The king, his chosen representative Judge, other
Judges, the Law, the Accountant and the Scribe, Gold, Fire, Water, and
the Bailiff are the ten components of the Court; in which the King
examines causes with due attention.’

Do. (1.20 *et. seq*.).—‘Let the King try causes, attended by these
Judges, after having entered the Court, in a sitting or standing
posture. Having risen early in the morning and performed ablutions
according to rule, and having honoured the elders, astrologers,
physicians, deities, Brāhmaṇas and domestic priests.’

Do. (27.25).—‘Let the King every day examine in common with learned
Brāhmaṇas, the suits preferred by litigants, as also those instituted by
the King himself.’
