+++
title = "003 प्रत्यहन् देशदृष्टैश्"

+++
*Gautama* (II. 19-24).—‘His administration of justice shall be regulated
by the Veda, the institutes of the sacred law, the subsidiary sciences
and the Purāṇa; the local laws, the customs of castes and families—which
arc not opposed to the sacred laws—have also authority. Cultivators,
traders, herdsmen, money-lenders and artisans have the authority to lay
down rules for their respective classes. Having learnt the state of
affairs from those who have authority to speak, the King shall give the
decision. Reasoning is a means for getting at truth; coming to a
conclusion through that, he shall decide properly.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.17).—‘Manu has declared that the peculiar laws of
countries, castes and families may be followed in the absence of
revealed texts.’

Do. (16.4-5).—‘Let him reason properly regarding an offence; he who
reasons properly regarding an offence, in accordance with the sum of the
science of the first two castes is equitable towards all living beings.’

*Kātyāyana* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 31).—‘The King shall decide suits
according to the Śāstras; where there are no texts to guide him, he
shall decide in accordance with local custom.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.23).—‘Having entered the Court in the forenoon, together
with elders, ministers, and attendants, he should try causes and listen
to expositions of the Purāṇas, Law-codes and Rules of Polity.’

Do. (1.33).—‘People who arc ignorant of the customs of the country,
unbelievers, despisers of the sacred books, insane, irrate, avaricious
or diseased should not he consulted in the decision of causes.’

Do. (27.24).—‘Such customs as are not opposed to the laws of the country
and castes or other corporations—the King should establish in accordance
with the sacred law.’

*Nārada* (3.5).—‘The members of the royal court of justice must be
acquainted with the sacred law and with rules of precedence,—noble, not
avaricious and impartial towards friend and foe.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Rājadharma, 215.50).—‘He shall attend upon Brāhmaṇas
versed in the Veda and the sciences.’

*Agnipurāṇa* (234.7-9).—‘He shall then see the preceptor and having
received his blessings, enter the Court; therein he shall see the
Brāhmaṇas, Ministers and Councillors; and then proceed to try the
law-suits, holding consultations with the Councillors.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra).—‘Suits shall be decided by the
king or by the learned Brāhmaṇa appointed as Judge.’
