+++
title = "009 यदा स्वयम्"

+++
*Gautama* (13.26).—‘The King or the Judge or a Brāhmaṇa learned in the
scriptures shall try the suit.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.2).—‘Let the King or his minister transact the business
on the bench.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.73).—‘Or let him entrust a Brāhmaṇa with the judicial
business.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.3).—‘The Brāhmaṇa knowing the entire Dharma shall be
appointed by the King to try law-suits, if, under pressure of business,
he is unable to look into them himself.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.24).—‘Let the King, or a member of the twice-born caste
officiating as Chief Judge, try causes acting on principles of equity,
and abiding by the opinion of the judges and the doctrine of the sacred
law.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.23-34).—‘Where the King cannot personally attend to the
administration of justice, he should appoint a Brāhmaṇa who is versed in
the Vedas, self-controlled, highborn, impartial, unagitated and calm,
who fears the next life, is religious-minded, active and devoid of
anger. If the Brāhmaṇa is not learned enough, the King should appoint a
Kṣatriya, or a Vaiśya who is versed in the sacred law; but he should
never appoint the Śūdra, The king should always appoint men of the caste
to which he himself belongs; as most members of the royal caste are
likely to be well-qualified.’

*Nārada* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahāra, p. 22).—‘He is called the Chief
Judge who,—fully acquainted with the eighteen titles of law and with the
eight thousand subdivisions thereof, skilled in Logic and other
sciences, and thoroughly versed in revealed and traditional
lore,—investigates the law relative to the case in hand by *putting
questions* and *passing decisions* according to what was heard or
understood by him.’

*Kātyāyana* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahāra, p. 22).—‘When no Brāhmaṇa is
available, the King shall appoint a Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya versed in legal
lore; but he shall avoid the Śūdra.’

*Prajāpati* (Smṛticandrikā).—‘The anointed King or the learned Brāhmaṇa,
seated on the seat of judgment, shall investigate the suits quietly.’
