+++
title = "030 प्रणष्ट-स्वामिकं रिक्थम्"

+++
*Gautama* (10.36-38).—‘Those who find lost, property, the owner of which
is not known, shall report it to the King. The King shall cause it to be
proclaimed and hold it in his custody for a year. After that one-fourth
of the value of the property goes to the finder and the remainder to the
King.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.19-20).—‘Property entirely given up goes to the King. If
it be otherwise, the King with his ministers and the citizens shall
administer it.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.33).—‘The property lost and found, the King shall make
over to him to whom it belongs; if he fails to substantiate with proofs
his claim to it, he shall he punished with fine equal to the value of
the property.’

Do. (2.172).—‘If a man obtains from another person the property that had
been stolen or lost,—without reporting it to the King—he should he fined
96 *Paṇas*.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.173).—‘When a stolen or lost property is brought to the
King by the customs-officers or by village-officers, the owner thereof
shall get it if he turns up before one year; after that the King shall
take it himself.’

*Agnipurāṇa* (Rājadharma, 222.16-17).—(Same as Manu.)

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 96).—‘If the owner of the lost property proves his
ownership, he obtains what had been lost and recovered. If he fails to
prove his ownership, he is fined the fifth part of the value of the
article: and the article becomes the lawful property of the King; if the
owner takes forcible possession of the article lost and found, he is to
he fined the first amercement. Property lost and found should remain
deposited in the Customs Office; and after three fortnights, it is to he
handed over to the rightful owner or surrendered to the royal treasury.’
