+++
title = "041 जाति-जानपदान् धर्मान्"

+++
*Gautama* (11.10, 11, 20, 21).—‘Those who leave the path of duty, he
shall lead back to it;—for it is declared that he obtains a share of the
spiritual merit gained by his subjects. The laws of countries, castes
and families, which are not opposed to the scriptures, also have
authority. Cultivators, traders, herdsmen, money-lenders and artisans
have authority to lay down regulations for their respective classes.’

*Āpastamba* (2.15.1).—‘The above considerations dispose also of the law
of custom which is observed in countries or families.’

*Bodhāyana* (1.2.1-8).—‘There is a difference of opinion regarding live
practices in the South and in the North. He who follows those practices
in any other country than where they prevail, commits sin; for each of
those practices, the custom of the country should he the authority.
Gautama declares that this is wrong; and one should not take heed of any
of these practices, because they are opposed to the traditions of the
cultured.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.17).—‘Manu has declared that the peculiar laws of
countries, castes, and families may he followed in the absence of
revealed texts.’

Do. (19.7).—‘Let the King, paying attention to all the laws of
countries, castes and families, make the four castes fulfil their
particular duties.’

*Viṣṇu* (3.3).—‘To keep the four castes and the four orders firm in the
practice of their several duties.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.360).—‘Families, castes, guilds, corporations and the
provinces,—when those deviate from the paths of their duty, the King
should check them and bring them round to the right path.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.89-91)—‘The King should perform his duty by carefully
studying the customs that are followed in countries and are mentioned in
the scriptures, as well as those that are practised by castes, villages,
corporations and families. Those customs that have been introduced in
the country, caste or race should be maintained in the same condition;
for otherwise the people get perplexed.’

*Nārada* (1.7).—‘Families, guilds, corporations, one appointed by the
King and the King himself are invested with the power to decide
law-suits,—each succeeding one being superior to the one preceding in
order.’

*Bṛhaspati* (1.26-30).—‘Cultivators, artisans, artists, money-lenders,
persons belonging to particular religious sects and robbers should
adjust their disputes according to the rules of their own profession.
The King shall cause the disputes of ascetics and of persons versed in
sorcery and witchcraft to be settled by persons familiar with the three
Vedas, and not decide them himself, for fear of rousing their
resentment. Relatives, companies of artisans, assemblies, and other
persons duly authorised by the King should decide law-suits among men,
excepting causes concerning violent crimes; Meetings of Kindred,
companies of artisans, assemblies and chief judges are declared to he
the resorts for the passing of sentences,—to whom he whose cause has
been previously tried may appeal in succession.’

*Bṛhaspati* (2.26.28).—‘When a decision is passed in accordance with
local custom, logic or the opinion of traders, the issue of the case is
over-ruled by it. When the King, disregarding established custom, passes
sentence, it is called the *edict of the king*, and local custom is
over-ruled by it. The time-honoured institutions of each country, caste
and family should be preserved intact; otherwise the people would rise
in rebellion.’
