+++
title = "053 अदेश्यं यश्"

+++
**(verses 8.53-57)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.16).—‘If one party tries to enforce his claim by
himself, though it has been disputed,—or if on being called, he runs
away, without saying anything, he should be non-suited and also fined.’

*Kātyāyana* (Smṛticandrikā-Vyavahāra, p. 107).—‘If a party on being
directed to *speak out*, does not speak, he should be immediately
confined; and on the next day he should be declared to be *non-suited*.’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 621).—‘If a party proceeds to enforce his claim
without applying to the King, he should be immediately punished and his
claim not allowed.’

*Nārada* (2.32-33).—‘One who takes to flight after haying received the
summons, one who remains silent, one who is convicted of untruth by the
deposition of witnesses, and one who makes a confession himself;—these
are the four kinds of persons *defeated*, *avasanna*. One who alters his
former statements, one who shuns judicial investigation, one who fails
to appear, one who makes no reply, one who absconds on receiving the
summons;—these are the five kinds of persons *non-suited*, *hīna*.’

*Nārada* (2.41).—‘A man convicted by his own confession, one defeated
through his own conduct, one whom the judicial investigation has proved
to be in the wrong,—these three deserve to have their final defeat
declared at the hands of judges.’

*Bṛhaspati* (5.5-6).—‘One who absconds after receiving the summons, one
who remains silent, one convicted by the deposition of witnesses, and
one who admits the correctness of the charge;—these are the four *losers
of the suit*. One who absconds loses the suit after three fortnights;
one who remains silent, after a week; one convicted by the deposition of
witnesses and one who has confessed, immediately.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 622).—‘After having declared his plaint, if he
renounces it and says something else, then, having taken up a different
position, he becomes non-suited. Having reduced his statement to
writing, if subsequently he says something more or less than that, he
becomes non-suited. After having preferred his claim, if he says *I did
not say this*, or if he contradicts his former statement, he also should
he declared to he non-suited. After having named his witnesses, if he,
of his own accord, does not bring them up for deposition, he should be
declared to be non-suited, after thirty days.’
