+++
title = "061 यादृशा धनिभिः"

+++
**(verses 8.61-63)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (1-19.13).—‘Men of the four castes who have sons may be
witnesses, excepting *Śṛotriyas*, the King, ascetics and those destitute
of human intelligence.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.8).—‘Descendants of a noble race, who are virtuous and
wealthy, sacrifices, zealous in the practice of religious austerities,
having male issue, well versed in the holy law, studious, veracious,
acquainted with the three Vedas and aged—shall be witnesses.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.68.69).—‘Persons devoted to austerities, charitable, of
noble families, veracious, heedful of righteousness, straightforward,
with sons, wealthy, devoted to acts prescribed in the Śruti and in
Smṛtis;—such persons shall be witnesses;—they shall be at least three in
number; the caste of the witnesses being consonant with the caste of the
parties; or members of all castes may be witnesses for all eases.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.16).—‘There should be nine, seven, five, four or three
witnesses; or two only, if they are learned Brāhmaṇas, are proper; but
let him never examine an only witness.’

*Gautama* (13.2.3).—‘Witnesses shall be many, faultless as regards the
performance of their duties, worthy to be trusted by the King, and free
from affection for, or hatred against, either party;—they may be even
Śūdras.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.28),—‘Those may be witnesses who are in the habit of
performing religious acts enjoined in the Vedas and Smṛtis, free from
covetousness and malice, of respectable parentage, irreproachable,
zealous in austerities, liberal and sympathetic.’

*Āpastamba* (2.29.7).—‘A person possessed of good qualities may be
called as a witness, and he shall, answer the questions.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.28).—‘Śrotriyas, men of unblemished form, of good
character, men who are holy and love truth, are fit to be witnesses;—or
men of any caste may give evidence regarding men of any other caste.’

*Nārada* (1.153-154).—‘The witnesses shall be of honourable family,
straightforward and unexceptionable as to their descent, their actions
and their fortunes. They shall not be less than three in number,
unimpeachable, honest and pure-minded. They shall be Brāhmaṇas,
Kṣatriyas or Vaiśyas or irreproachable Śūdras. Each of these shall be
witness for his own order; or all of them may be witnesses for all.’
