+++
title = "064 नाऽर्थसम्बन्धिनो नाप्ता"

+++
**(verses 8.64-67)  
**

*Gautama* (13.2).—(See under 63.)

*Āpastamba* (2.29.7).—(See under 63.)

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.28).—(See under 63.)

*Viṣṇu* (8.2-4).—‘The King cannot be made a witness; nor an ascetic, nor
a learned Brāhmaṇa, nor a gamester, nor a thief, nor a person who is not
his own master, nor a woman, nor a child, nor a perpetrator of violence,
nor one overaged, nor one intoxicated or insane, nor a man of
ill-repute, nor an outcast, nor one tormented by hunger or thirst, nor
one oppressed by a sudden calamity, nor one wholly absorbed in evil
passions;—nor an enemy or a friend, nor one interested in the
subject-matter, nor one who does forbidden acts; nor one formerly
perjured; nor an attendant; nor one who, without being appointed, comes
and offers his evidence.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.70-71).—‘The following are not to be made
witnesses:—Woman, child, aged person, gamester, one intoxicated or
insane, one accused of a heinous crime, actor, heretic, forger, one with
defective organs, outcast, a near relative, or one related in business,
friend, enemy, thief, one addicted to violence, those beset with
perceptible faults, one despised (by good men).’

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.13).—(See under 62.)

*Nārada* (1.157-162).—‘Incompetent witnesses have been declared by the
learned to be of five sorts: (1) Actually declared by law to be
incompetent, (2) incompetent on account of depravity, (3) incompetent by
reason of contradiction, (4) one of uncalled for deposition, (5) one of
intervening decease. (1) Learned Brāhmaṇas, devotees, aged persons and
ascetics are those who have been declared by law to be incompetent,
without any reason being given for it;—(2) thieves, robbers, dangerous
characters, gamblers and assassins are incompetent by reason of their
depravity, there is no truth to be found in them;—(3) if the statements
of witnesses called by the King do not agree, they are rendered
incompetent by reason of contradiction,—(4) he who, without being
appointed to be a witness, comes of his own accord to make a deposition,
is called a *spy* in the law-books and he is unworthy to bear
testimony;—(5) where can any person bear testimony, if the claimant is
no longer in existence, whose claim should have been heard? Such a
person is rendered incompetent by reason of intervening decease.’

*Nārada* (1.177-192).—‘Those must not be examined as witnesses who are
interested in the suit; nor friends or associates or enemies or
notorious offenders or persons stained with a heavy sin;—nor a slave or
an impostor, or one not admitted to Śrāddhas; nor a child, nor an
oil-presser, nor one intoxicated, nor a mad man, nor a careless man, nor
one distressed, nor a gamester, nor one who sacrifices for the whole
village;—nor one engaged in a long journey, nor a merchant who travels
to transmarine countries, nor a religious ascetic, nor one sick or
deformed; nor a simple man, nor a learned Brāhmaṇa, nor one who neglects
religious practices, nor a eunuch nor an actor;—nor an atheist, nor an
apostate, nor one who has forsaken his wife or his fire, nor one who
makes illicit offerings, nor an associate who eats out of the same dish
as oneself, nor an adversary, nor a spy, nor a relation, nor one related
by the same womb;—nor one who has proved an evil-doer, nor a public
dancer, nor one who lives by poison, nor a snake-catcher, nor a
poisoner, nor an incendiary, nor one who has committed a minor
offence;—nor one oppressed by fatigue, nor a ferocious man, nor one who
has relinquished worldly appetites, nor one penniless, nor a member of
the lowest castes, nor one leading a bad life, nor one still a student,
nor an oilman nor a dealer in roots;—nor one obsessed by a demon, nor an
enemy of the King, nor a weather-prophet, nor an astrologer, nor a
malicious person, nor one self-sold, nor one of deficient limbs, nor one
living by prostitution;—nor one with bad nails or black teeth, nor one
who betrays his friend, nor a rogue, nor a dealer in spirituous liquor,
nor a juggler, nor an avaricious or cruel man, nor an enemy of the
company of traders or of an association;—nor one who takes animal-life,
nor a leather-manufacturer, or a cripple, or an outcast, or a forger, or
a quack, or an apostate, or a robber, or one of the King’s
attendants;—nor a Brāhmaṇa who sells human beings, cattle meat, bones,
honey, milk, water or butter; nor a member of a twice-born caste who is
addicted to usury;—nor one who neglects his duties, nor a judge, nor a
bard, nor one who serves low people, nor one who quarrels with his
father, nor one who causes dissension. These are the incompetent
witnesses. When a heinous crime, or a robbery or adultery or defamation
has been committed, the King should not inquire too strictly into the
character of the witnesses. A child also cannot be made a witness; nor a
woman, nor one man alone, nor a cheat, nor a relation, nor an enemy. By
the consent of both parties even one man alone may become a witness in a
suit.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.29-30).—‘The mother’s father, the father’s brother, the
wife’s brother, maternal uncle, brother, friend and son-in-law are
inadmissible as witnesses in all disputes. Persons addicted to adultery
or to drinking, gamblers, calumniators, insane, suitering, violent
persons and unbelievers cannot act as witnesses.’
