+++
title = "070 स्त्रियाप्य् असम्भावे"

+++
**(verses 8.70-72)**

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, pp. 670-671).—‘In cases of disobedience of the
royal edict, of adultery, of violent crimes, of theft and of
assaults,—one should not be particular regarding the admissibility of
witnesses. In the case of occurrences within a house, or at night, or
outside the village, if a suit is brought forward, the King shall not be
very particular regarding the admissibility of witnesses.’

*Uśanas* (Aparārka, pp. 670-671).—‘A slave, a blind man, a deaf man,
women, children, very aged persons and others,—if they are not connected
with the parties—may he witnesses in the case of crimes of violence. All
those persons who have been declared to he incompetent witnesses may he
admitted as witnesses according to the gravity of the case. But even so
a child, or a single person, or a woman, or forger, or a relative or an
enemy should not be admitted; as they would he found to depose falsely;
the child would do it through ignorance, the woman through inherent
untruthfulness, the forger by reason of his being a habitual wrong-doer,
the relations through their affection, and the enemy as a means of
revenge.’

*Gautama* (13.9).—‘There can be no objection against any witness in a
case of criminal hurt.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.6).—‘In cases of theft, of violence, abuse and assault, and
of adultery, the competence of witnesses should not be examined too
strictly.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.72).—‘All persons may be witnesses in cases of
adultery, of theft, of assault and of violent crimes.’

*Nārada* (1.189).—‘In cases of heinous crime, or robbery, or adultery,
or one of the two kinds of assault, he should not enquire too strictly
into the character of the witnesses.’

*Nārada* (1.188).—‘Slaves, impostors and other incompetent witnesses
enunciated shall nevertheless be witnesses in suits of especially grave
character.’
