+++
title = "073 बहुत्वम् परिगृह्णीयात्"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (8.39).—‘If there is contradictory evidence, let the King decide
by the majority of witnesses; if there is equality in number, by
superiority in virtue; if there is parity in virtue, by the evidence of
the best among the twice-born.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.78, 80).—‘When there is contradiction, the evidence of
the majority should be accepted; when the number of witnesses is equal
on both sides, then the evidence of those better qualified should he
accepted; when there is contradiction among witnesses equally qualified,
the evidence of those should be accepted who are possessed of the best
qualifications. Even after the witnesses have deposed, if other
witnesses, either better qualified or in larger numbers, come forward to
depose to the contrary, the former witnesses should be rejected as
false.’

*Nārada* (1.229).—‘When there is conflicting evidence, the majority of
witnesses decides the matter. If the number of witnesses is equal on
both sides, the testimony of those should be accepted as correct whose
veracity is not liable to suspicion. If the number of such witnesses is
equal on both sides, the testimony of those should be accepted who are
possessed of a superior memory.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.35).—‘In a conflict among witnesses, the testimony of the
majority should be accepted; when the number is equal on both sides, the
testimony of the more virtuous ones; when the virtuous witnesses are
divided, the testimony of those specially eminent for the performance of
righteous acts; whenever those are divided, the testimony of those
endowed with superior memory.’
