+++
title = "074 समक्षदर्शनात् साक्ष्यम्"

+++
*Bodhāyana* (1.19.7).—‘In order to gain the good opinion of men, a
witness shall give evidence in accordance with what he has seen or
heard.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.13-14).—‘The evidence of witnesses is of two kinds—what was
seen and what was heard. Witnesses are free from blame if they give true
evidence.’

*Nārada* (1.148).—‘He should he considered as a witness who has
witnessed a deed with his own ears or eyes; with his ears, if he has
heard another man speaking; with his eyes, if he has seen something
himself.’

*Bṛhaspati* (7.8-13).—‘That witness is denominated a *messenger* who is
a respectable man, esteemed and appointed by both parties, and has come
near them to listen to the speeches of the plaintiff and the defendant.
He is a *spontaneous* witness who declares that he has witnessed the
transaction, after having approached the court of his own accord, while
a cause is being heard. That witness who communicates to another man
what he has heard, at a time when he is about to go abroad, or is lying
on his death-bed, should he considered as an *indirect* witness. He also
is called an *indirect* witness who repeats, from his own hearing or
from hearsay, the previous statements of actual witnesses. He is called
a *secret* witness to whom an affair has been entrusted or communicated
by both parties, or who happens to witness the transaction. The King
himself, having heard the statements of both the Plaintiff and the
Defendant, may act as a witness.’
