+++
title = "079 सभान्तः साक्षिणः"

+++
**(verses 8.79-86)  
**

*Śukranīti* (4.5.398-414).—‘The witness should be interrogated, after
being well-governed by oaths, teachings of Purāṇas, narration of great
merits of virtue and the great sins of falsehood:—“Where, when, how,
whence and what have you seen or heard,—whether written by the man
himself or caused to be written by somebody,—speak truly all that you
know.” The witness who gives true evidence attains happy life hereafter
and unrivalled fame in this world—this is the remark of Brahmā, etc.’
(the rest as in Manu 83-85).

*Nārada* (1.198 and 200).—‘After having summoned all the witnesses and
hound them down firmly by an oath, the Judge shall examine them
separately. They should be men of tried integrity and conversant with
the circumstances of the case. By sacred texts extolling the excellence
of truth and denouncing the sinfulness of falsehood, let him inspire
them with deep awe, as follows—(Verses 201 to 228—201, 208, 209 being
the same as Manu 93, 98, 99 respectively)’.—\[All this is to be
addressed to all witnesses; Manu reserves 89 to 101 for *Śūdra*
witnesses only.\]

*Gautama* (13.5).—‘Witnesses shall not speak singly, or without being
asked.’

*Āpastamba* (2.29.7).—‘A person who is possessed of good qualities may
be called as witness and shall answer the questions put to him,
according to the truth...... after having been exhorted to be fair to
both sides.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.24 *et seq*.).—‘Let him exhort the witnesses with the
following speeches—“Whatever places of torture await the killer of a
Brāhmaṇa and other great criminals... those places of abode are ordained
for a witness who gives false evidence; and the fruit of every virtuous
act he has done, from the day of his birth to his dying day, shall he
lost to him. Truth makes the sun spread his rays; Truth makes the moon
shine; Truth makes the wind blow; Truth makes the earth bear all things;
Truth makes waters flow; Truth makes the fire burn. The atmosphere
exists through truth; so do the gods; and so do the offerings. If
veracity and a thousand horse-sacrifices are weighed against each other,
truth ranks even higher than a thousand horse-sacrifices. Those who,
acquainted with the facts, and appointed to give evidence, stand mute,
are equally criminal with, and deserve the same severe punishment as,
false witnesses.” After having addressed him thus, let the King examine
the witnesses in the order of their castes.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.73-75).—‘He shall address the following words to the
witnesses standing near the plaintiff and defendant—“He who hears false
witness goes to those regions which are reserved for people committing
heinous offences, and other crimes, for incendiaries, for murderers of
women and children. Whatever virtuous act you may have done during a
hundred lives, understand that all that will go to the party whom, by
your false evidence, you make lose the suit.”’

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.9 *et seq*.).—‘The wise man should address an
appointed witness in the following manner:—“Whatever merit thou hast
acquired, etc., etc.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.32-34).—‘Depose, O witness, according to the truth;
expecting thy answers, thy ancestors hang in suspense, as to whether
they shall rise or fall, etc., etc.’
