+++
title = "109 असाक्षिकेषु त्व्"

+++
*Gautama* (13.12-13).—‘Some declare that the witnesses shall be charged
with oath to speak the truth. In the case of others than Brāhmaṇas that
oath shall be sworn in the presence of Gods, of Brāhmaṇas and of the
King.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.19).—‘Let the Judge summon the witnesses, at the time of
sunrise, and examine them, after having bound them by an oath.’

*Viṣṇu* (9.33).—‘Let the Judge summon the defendant at the time of
sunrise, after having fasted on the previous day and bathed in his
clothes, and make him go through all the ordeals in the presence of Gods
and of Brāhmaṇas.’

*Nārada* (1.235, 236, 239).—‘When owing to the negligence of the
creditor, both documentary evidence and witnesses are missing,—and the
defendant denies his obligation, three different methods may be
adopted:—Timely reminder, Argument, and thirdly, Oath; these are the
measures that the plaintiff should adopt against his adversary. If
arguments are of no avail, let him cause the defendant to undergo one of
the ordeals.’

*Nārada* (1.247-249).—‘If no witness is forthcoming, for either of the
two litigant parties, he must test them through ordeals and oaths of
every sort. When a heavy crime has been committed, the King shall
administer one of the ordeals: in light cases, the virtuous king shall
swear the man with oaths.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.97).—‘Calling him at sun-rise, after he has fasted and
bathed with clothes on, he shall make him go through the ordeals, in the
presence of Gods, Brāhmaṇas and the King.’

*Bṛhaspati* (10.1-3).—‘A forger of gems, pearl or coral, one withholding
a deposit, a ruffian and an adulterer shall, in every case, be tested by
oaths and ordeals. In charges related to heavy crimes, or to the
appropriation of a deposit, the King should try the case by ordeals,
even though there be witnesses. When a thing has happened long ago, or
in secret, or when the witnesses have disappeared, or are perjured all
of them,—the trial should be conducted by having recourse to an ordeal.’

*Śukranīti* (4-5.460).—‘When argument also fails, ordeal has to be used
in the investigation of cases.’

Do. (4-5.525).—‘If one party urges *human* evidence, and the other
*divine*, the King should accept the former, not the latter.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5, 529).—‘The six kinds of decision are—through evidence,
argument, custom, oaths, king’s edict and confession by the defendant.’
