+++
title = "124 दश स्थानानि"

+++
**(verses 8.124-125)  
**

*Gautama* (12.46-47).—‘Corporal punishment must not be inflicted on the
Brāhmaṇa.—Desisting from the deed, publicly proclaiming his crime,
banishment and branding are the punishments to which a Brāhmaṇa may be
subjected.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.1-8).—‘Great criminals should all be put to death. In the
case of the Brāhmaṇa no corporal punishment should be inflicted. A.
Brāhmaṇa should be banished from his own country, his body having been
branded;—for murdering another Brāhmaṇa, let the figure of a headless
body be branded on his forehead; for drinking spirits, the flag of a
wine-seller; for stealing gold, a dog’s foot; for incest, a female
part;—if he has committed any other capital offence, he shall be
banished, taking with him all his property, and unhurt.’

*Nārada* (114.8-10).—‘For a crime of violence of the highest degree, a
fine amounting to no less than a thousand *Paṇas* has been ordained.
Moreover, corporal punishment, confiscation of the entire property,
banishment from the town, branding, as well as amputation of the limb,
is declared to be the punishment for a violent crime of the highest
degree. This gradation of punishments has been ordained for all castes
indiscriminately, excepting only corporal punishment in the case of a
Brāhmaṇa, who should never he subjected to corporal punishment. Shaving
his head, banishing him from the town, branding him on the forehead with
a mark of the crime of which he has been convicted, and parading him on
an ass, shall he the Brāhmaṇa’s punishment.’

Do. (15-16.20).—‘The Brāhmaṇa and the King are exempt from censure and
corporal punishment.’

Do. (15-16.22-31).—‘If a Śūdra insults a member of a higher caste with
invectives, he shall have his tongue cut out; if he refers to their name
or caste contemptuously, an iron-rod ten inches long shall be thrust
red-hot into his mouth;—if ho is insolent enough to teach duty to a
Brāhmaṇa, the King shall have hot oil poured into his mouth and ears.
With whatever limb a low caste man offends against a Brāhmaṇa, that very
limb of his shall be cut off; such shall be the atonement for his crime.
If a low-born man tries to place himself on the same seat as his
superior, he shall be branded on his hip and banished; or he may have
his backside gashed. If, through arrogance, he spits on his superior,
the King shall have both his lips cut off; if he urinates on him, then
his penis; if he breaks wind against him, the buttocks. If he pulls his
superior by the hair, he shall have his hands cut off; likewise if he
seizes him by the feet, beard, neck or scrotum. If a man censures a King
who is devoted to the discharge of his duties, he shall have his tongue
cut out, or his entire property confiscated. When an evil-minded person
assails even a wicked king, he shall be fastened on a stake and burnt in
fire.’

*Nārada* (Punishments, 41-439).—‘Let him not on any account kill a
Brāhmaṇa, though convicted of all crimes; he may at pleasure cause him
to be banished; let the King take his entire wealth from him, or leave a
fourth part of it; for four offences of a Brāhmaṇa, branding has been
ordained.’

*Bṛhaspati* (21.8).—‘For killing, capital punishment.’

Do. (21.15).—‘If persons begotten in the inverse order of castes, and
members of the lowest caste, should insult a Brāhmaṇa, they shall be
corporally punished, and shall never be amerced in fine.’

Do. (22.10).—‘Judges passing an unjust sentence, those who take bribes,
and those who betray confidence,—all such shall be banished.’

Do. (22.17).—‘House-breakers shall be impaled on a stake, and highwaymen
shall be bound and hanged by the neck from a tree.’

Do. (22.20).—‘Stealers of grass deserve to have a hand cut off.’

*Nārada* (Punishments, 36-37).—‘Svāyambhuva Manu has declared ten spots
of punishment which should be selected in punishing the lower castes; a
Brāhmaṇa should remain uninjured always;—those places are the privy
parts, the belly, the tongue, the two hands, and fifthly, the two feet;
as well as the eye, the nose, the two ears, the property and the body.’

*Bṛhaspati* (27.9-10).—‘Both hands, both feet, the male organ, the eye,
the tongue, the ears, the nose, the neck, the half of the foot, the
thumb and the index finger, the forehead, the lips, the hind part and
the hips;—these fourteen spots of punishment have been indicated. For a
Brāhmaṇa, branding on the forehead is the only kind of punishment. A
Brāhmaṇa, though a mortal sinner, shall not suffer capital punishment;
the King shall banish him and cause him to be branded and shaved.’
