+++
title = "139 ऋणे देये"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (6.20-22).—‘If a creditor goes before the King and fully proves
his demand, the debtor shall pay as fine to the King a tenth part of the
sum proved. The creditor, on receiving the sum, shall pay the twentieth
part of it. If the whole demand has been contested by the debtor, and
even a part of it has been proved against him, he must pay the whole.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.44).—‘Out of the sum proved against him, the King shall
make the debtor pay ten per cent, (as fine) and the creditor, on having
realised his dues, shall pay five per cent,’

*Nārada* (1.132-134).—‘If a wealthy debtor, from malice) refuses to pay
his debt, the King shall compel him to pay it by forcible means, and
shall take five in the hundred for himself. If the debtor acknowledges
the debt with his own mouth, the King shall take from him ten per cent,
of the debt as fine; and twice as much if he has been convicted. If the
debtor, owing to a calamity, has not means sufficient to discharge the
whole debt, the claim of the creditor shall be entered in a legal
document, specifying the caste of the debtor and of the creditor, their
names, and the names of their neighbours.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.60-02).—‘When the time fixed for pay ment has elapsed,
and the accruing of interest has ceased, the creditor may either recover
his loan or cause a new bond to bo written in the form of compound
interest. This rule concerns an acknowledged debt; but a debtor denying
his liability shall be compelled to pay, on the debt being proved in a
court, by a document or by witnesses.’

*Yama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 78).—‘If a wealthy debtor refuses to repay
the debt, through ill-will, he should be compelled by the King to pay,
after having realised from him double the amount of the claim.’
