+++
title = "140 वसिष्ठविहितां वृद्धिम्"

+++
**(verses 8.140-142)  
**

*Gautama* (12.29-30).—‘The legal interest for money lent is five *māṣas*
a month for twenty *kārṣāpaṇas*. Some declare that this rate should not
he paid longer than one year.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.48).—‘They quote the following—2, 3, 4 or 5, in the
hundred, he may take as interest per month, according to the order of
the castes.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.51).—‘The interest for a money-lender declared by Vaśiṣṭha
is five *māṣas* for twenty *Kāṛṣāpanas*, per month.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.37).—‘In the case of loans with pledges, the interest
per month shall be the eightieth part; in those without pledges, it
shall be 2, 3, 4 or 5 per cent, respectively for the Brāhmaṇa, the
Kṣatriya, the Vaiśya and the Śūdra.’

*Nārada* (1.99-101).—‘Let a money-lender take, in addition to the
principal, the interest fixed by Vaśiṣṭha, *viz*., an eightieth part of
a hundred every month. 2, 3, or 5 (in the hundred) is the legitimate
rate of interest; let him take as much in the shape of interest, every
month, in the direct order of the four castes. Or let him take 2 in the
100, remembering the practice of the virtuous.

*Bṛhaspati* (11.3).—‘An eightieth part of the principal accrues as
interest on it every month; and it is doubled by such interest within
six years and eight months.’

*Artha-Śāstra* (p. 61).—‘The legal interest, per month, on every 100
Paṇas, is 1¼ Paṇas; it is 5 Paṇas in business transactions; 10 Paṇas for
people trading in forests; and 20 Paṇas for those trading on the seas.’

*Viṣṇu* (6.1-5).—‘A creditor shall receive his principal back from his
debtor exactly as he had lent it to him. As regards interest, he shall
take, in the direct order of the castes, 2, 3, 4 or 5 percent., per
month, if no pledge has been given; or the debtor of any caste may pay
as much as has been promised by him. After the lapse of one year, let
them pay interest according to the afore-mentioned rule, even though it
may not have been agreed upon. By the use of the pledge, interest
becomes forfeited.’
