+++
title = "143 न त्व्"

+++
**(verses 8.143-144)  
**

*Gautama* (12-32).—‘A loan secured by a pledge that is used by the
creditor bears no interest.’

*Viṣṇu* (6.5).—‘If the pledge is used, interest becomes forfeited.’

*Nārada* (l.125-229).—‘A pledge is of two kinds—one to be kept, and one
for use. It must be preserved in the same condition in which it was
given; otherwise, the pledgee loses interest...... A pledge must not be
used forcibly; by so using it, the pledgee forfeits the interest due to
him. That foolish person who uses a pledge without the authority of the
owner, shall lose one half of his interest, as a compensation for such
use. If a *pledge for use* has been given, the creditor must not take
interest due on the loan.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.18 *et seq*.).—‘Should the creditor, actuated by
avarice, use a pledge before interest has ceased to accrue on the loan,
or before the stipulated period has expired, such use shall be stopped.
The pledge has to be kept carefully, like a deposit; interest becomes
forfeited in the event of its being damaged. If the pledge is used and
rendered worthless, the principal itself becomes forfeited; if a very
valuable pledge be spoilt, the creditor must satisfy the pledger.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.59).—‘There is no interest payable, if a pledge given
as deposit is used, or if a pledge given for use is destroyed; if it is
spoilt or lost, it should be replaced; except when such loss has been
due to an act of god or the King.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 659).—‘If the pledge in the form of gold and the
like, has been destroyed by the fault of the creditor, the debtor shall
pay the principal along with the interest accrued, and the creditor
shall be made to pay the value of the pledge to the debtor.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.).—‘If the pledgee makes use of the pledge without
authorisation, he shall pay the price of such use; or else, he shall
forfeit the interest.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 3).—‘The man who uses the pledge should pay the price
of such use; also a fine of 12 *paṇas*; if, by such use, the pledge
becomes lost or spoilt, the user should replace it, and also be fined 21
*paṇas*; so also when the pledge becomes lost in any other way. A pledge
given for use should not be allowed to be destroyed; nor in this case
should any interest accrue; if it is given for mere keeping and not for
use, then interest shall accrue.’
