+++
title = "147 यत् किम्"

+++
**(verses 8.147-148)  
**

*Gautama* (12.37-38).—‘The property of a person who is neither an idiot
nor a minor, having been used by strangers before his eyes for ten
years, comes to belong to him who uses it; but not if it is used by
Vedic Scholars, ascetics or royal officials.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.17)—‘Whatever property belonging to one has been enjoyed
by another person for ten years continuously is lost to the owner.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.24).—‘If a man sees his landed property being enjoyed
by others, and does not complain about it, he loses it after twenty
years of such possession: in the case of other properties, ownership
lapses after only ten years’ adverse possession.’

*Śukranīti* (1.5.443-46).—‘The property which is ceaselessly enjoyed for
sixty years, even without title, cannot be claimed hack by anybody. The
following cannot he destroyed by length of adverse possession: pledge,
boundary-land, minor’s property, trust property, sealed deposit, female
slaves, government property and property of the Vedic Scholar. The owner
who is indifferent to his property and does not complain about
trespasses on his property, cannot, get hack by law-suit that property,
on the expiry of the above period.’

*Nārada* (1.78-80).—‘If a man is foolish enough to allow his goods to he
enjoyed by strangers in his own eyesight, they shall belong to the
possessor, even in the presence, and during the life-time, of the
rightful owner. Whatever the owner looking on quietly suffers to be
enjoyed by strangers for ten years, though he is present, that cannot be
recovered by him. If he is neither an idiot nor a minor, and the
enjoyment takes place before his eyes, his right to it is extinct by
law, and the possessor is allowed to keep it.’

*Bṛhaspati* (9.7, 9, 10).—‘He, whose possession has been continuous from
the time of occupation, and has never been interrupted for a period of
thirty years, cannot he deprived of such property. He who does not raise
a protest when a stranger is giving away his landed property in his
sight, cannot again recover that estate, even though he he possessed of
a written title to it. Possession held by three generations produces
ownership for strangers, no doubt, when they are related to one another
in the degree of a *Sapiṇḍa*: it does not stand good in the case of
*Sakulyas*.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 632).—‘If the landed property of a man has been
enjoyed by others for twenty years, his ownership to it is not
restored.’
