+++
title = "151 कुसीदवृद्धिर् द्वैगुण्यम्"

+++
*Gautama* (12.31, 36).—‘If the loan remains outstanding for a long time,
the principal may bo doubled; after which the interest ceases. The
interest on animal-products, on wool, on agricultural produce, and on
beasts of burden shall not increase more than the live-fold value of the
object lent,’

*Viṣṇu* (6.11-14, 16, 17).—‘On gold, the interest shall rise no higher
than to make the debt double; on grain, three-fold; on cloth, fourfold;
on liquids eight-fold; on substances from which spirituous liquor is
extracted, on cotton, thread, leather, weapons, bricks, and charcoal,
the interest is unlimited; on objects other than those just mentioned,
it may be double.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.39).—‘For cattle and for women, the interest consists
in the form of their offspring; in the case of clarified butter and
other *Rasas*, the highest limit of interest is eight-fold; in that of
cloth, fourfold; in that of grains, threefold; and in that of gold,
double.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 643).—‘The money-lender shall receive double
the amount lent.’

*Nārada* (1.105-107).—‘There are special rules according to the local
usages of the country where the loan has been made. In some countries
the loan may grow till the amount of the principal has been reached; in
other countries it may grow till it becomes three, or four, or eight
times as large as the principal. The interest on gold, grain and clothes
may rise to two, three, or four times the principal. On liquids, the
interest may become octuple; of women and cattle, their offspring forms
the interest.

*Bṛhaspati* (11.13-16).—‘On gold and other precious metals, the interest
may make the debt double; on clothes and base metals, treble; on grain,
it is allowed to rise to four times the original amount; and so on
edible plants or fruits, beasts of burden and wool. It is allowed to
make the debt quintuple on pot-herbs; sextuple, on seeds and sugarcane;
and octuple, on salt, oil and spirituous liquor. Likewise on sugar and
honey, if the loan he of old standing. On grass, wood, bricks, thread,
substances from which spirits may he extracted, leaves, hones, leather,
weapons, flowers and fruits, no interest is ordained.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.631).—‘When the amount drawn from the debtor in the
form of interest has reached twice the principal, then the King shall
make the debtor pay only the principal and nothing more than that.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 17).—‘For gems, pearls, corals, for
gold and silver—and for agricultural products and for insect-products
(silk, etc.),—the interest shall stop at double of the principal. For
oils, wines, clarified butter, molasses and salt, it shall go up to
eight-fold.’
