+++
title = "153 नाऽति-सांवत्सरीं वृद्धिम्"

+++
*Gautama* (12.30, 34-35).—‘Some declare that the said rates of interest
should not be paid longer than a year. The following are the special
forms of interest:—Compound interest, Periodical interest, Stipulated
interest, Corporal interest, Daily interest and interest in the shape of
using the pledge.’

*Nārada* (l.102-104)—‘Interest has been declared in lawbooks to be of
four kinds:—Periodical, Stipulated, *Kāyikā*, and Compound. That which
runs by the month is Periodical interest; that promised by the debtor
himself is Stipulated interest; interest at the rate of one Paṇa and a
quarter, paid regularly without diminishing the principal, is denoted
*Kāyikā* interest; interest upon interest is called Compound interest.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.4-12).—‘Interest has been declared by some to be of four
kinds; by others, of five kinds; and by others again, of six kinds.
*Kāyikā*, *Kālikā*, *Cakravṛddhi*, *Kāritā*, *Śikhāvṛddhi*, and
*Bhogalābha*. *Kāyikā* interest is in the form of bodily labour;
*Kālikā* is what is due every month; *Cakravṛddhi* is interest on
interest; *Kāritā* is interest promised by the debtor; when interest is
received every day, it is called *Śikhāvṛddhi*; because it grows
constantly like *hair*, except on the loss of the head, that is, the
payment of the principal. The use of a mortgaged house, or the produce
of a field, is termed *Bhogalābha*. *Sikhā* interest, *Kāyikā* interest
and *Bhogalābha* interest shall be realised by the creditor so long as
the principal remains unpaid. But the use of a pledge after twice the
principal has been realised, compound interest, and the exaction of the
interest and the principal together are usury and are reprehensible.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.638).—‘Creditors take away people’s wealth by the
compound rate of interest; so the King should protect the people from
them.’
