+++
title = "158 यो यस्य"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (6.41).—‘Sureties are ordained for appearance, for honesty and
for payment; the first two kinds of surety must pay the debt on failure
of their engagements; as for the last, their sons also may be made to
pay.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.53).—‘Surety has been ordained for appearance, for
honesty and for payment; the first two should he made to repay the debt
on the failure of their engagements; as for the last, his sons also may
be made to pay.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.244-248).—‘Having noticed that the defendant brought up
by the Bailiff has other engagements, the King should take a suitable
surety for his appearance. “I shall pay what is not paid by this man,—I
shall present him before you,—I shall make him deliver a pledge,—You
have no fear from him;—I shall do what he fails to do;—such and such are
his occupations;—he does not swear falsely.”’

*Nārada* (1.118-119).—‘For appearance, for payment, and for honesty;
these are the three different purposes for which three sorts of sureties
have been ordained by the sages. If the debtors fail to discharge the
debt, or if they prove dishonest, the surety *for payment* and *for
honesty* must pay the debt; and so must the *surety for appearance*, if
he fails to produce the debtor.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.39-42).—‘For appearance, for honesty, for payment, and
for delivering the assets of the debtor—it is for these four different
purposes that sureties have been ordained by the sages in the legal
system. The first of these says, “I shall produce the man”; the second
says, “He is a respectable person”; the third says, “I shall pay the
debt”; the fourth says, “I shall deliver his assets.” If the debtors
fail in their engagements, the first two sureties must pay the sum lent
at the appointed time; both the last two sureties, and in default of
them, their sons, are liable for the debt, when the debtors break their
promise. The creditor should allow time for the surety to search for the
debtor who has absconded,—a fortnight, a month, or a month and a half,
according to the distance of the place where the man may he supposed to
he hiding.’

*Kātyāyana* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahāra, p. 186).—‘For the searching of
the absconding debtor, the surety should be given time, extending up to
a month and a half; if he produces him by that time, he should he
absolved from responsibility. If, even on the lapse of the time, he is
unable to produce him, he should be made to pay the debt.’
