+++
title = "159 प्रातिभाव्यं वृथादानम्"

+++
**(verses 8.159-162)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (16.31).—‘They quote the following:—“A son need not pay money
due by a surety, anything idly promised, money due for losses at play or
for spirituous liquor, nor what remains unpaid of a fine or a toll.”’

*Gautama* (12.41).—‘Money due by a surety, a commercial debt, a
marriage-fee, debts contracted for spirituous liquor or in gambling, and
a fine shall not involve the sons.’

*Viṣṇu* (6.41).—‘Surety is ordained for appearance, for honesty, and for
payment; the first two themselves (not their sons) shall pay the debt on
failure of the engagement; but of the last, the sons also would be
liable to pay.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2-47, 53, 54).—‘The son shall not pay his father’s debt
involved in connection with wine, or love or gambling, or with balances
of line and toll, or with idle gifts...... Surety is ordained for
appearance, for honesty and for payment; on failure of the engagement,
the first two shall pay the debt, and in the case of the last, his sons
also shall be liable to pay. In a case where the surety for appearance
or the surety for honesty has died, his son shall not he made to pay the
debt; but in the case of one for payment, the sons should pay.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.39-42).—(See under 158.)

Do. (11.51).—‘Sons shall not he made to pay a debt incurred by their
father for spirituous liquor, for losses at play, for idle gifts, for
promises made under the influence of love or wrath, or for suretyship;
nor the balance of a fine or toll.’

*Nārada* (1.118-19).—(See under 158.)

Do. (1.10).—‘The son must pay the debt contracted by the father,
excepting those debts which have been contracted from love or anger, or
for spirituous liquor, games or bailments.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 656).—‘The son shall pay the sum due by reason of
suretyship.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 656).—‘The debt contracted by the father in
connection with suretyship must be paid by the son.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.55, 56).—‘If there are several sureties, each shall pay
to the creditor his own proportionate share of the debt. If each one of
them has stood surety for the whole amount, the creditor may realise it
from them in any way he chooses. In a case where the surety has been
publicly compelled to pay the creditor, the debtor should pay to the
surety double of the amount paid by him.’

*Nārada* (1. 120, 121).—‘When there is a plurality of sureties, they
shall pay each proportionately, according to agreement. If they were
hound severally, the payment shall be made by any of them, as the
creditor pleases. Twice as much as the surety, harassed by the creditor,
has given to the creditor, shall the debtor pay hack to the surety.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11.44).—‘When a surety, being harassed, pays a proved debt
which he has vouched for, the debtor shall pay him twice as much, after
the lapse of a month and a half.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 657).—(Same as Bṛhaspati.)
