+++
title = "163 मत्तोन्मत्तार्ताध्यधीनैर् बालेन"

+++
*Yājñavalkya* (2.31, 32).—‘The King shall set aside transactions
effected either forcibly or under pressure; as also those effected by
women, or during night, or within the house, or outside the village, or
by enemies. A transaction is not valid when effected by one who is mad
or drunk or distressed or in trouble, or an infant, or frightened and so
forth,—as also what has been brought up by a person not related to
either party.’

*Nārada* (1.26, 29, 31, 39-41).—‘The sages declare that the transactions
of a woman have no validity; specially, gift, hypothecation, sale of a
house or a field. The transactions of a slave are declared invalid,
unless they have been sanctioned by his master. A youth who, though
independent, has not yet arrived at years of discretion, is not capable
of contracting valid debts. If a boy, or one who possesses no
independence, transacts anything, it is declared an invalid transaction
by persons acquainted with the law. That also which an independent
person does, who has lost control over his actions, is declared an
invalid transaction. Those persons are declared to have lost control
over their actions who are actuated by love or anger, or tormented, or
oppressed by fear or misfortune, or biassed by friendship or hatred’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 638).—‘Any transaction that has been effected by
women, or at night, or outside the village, or inside a house, or at
night, should have to he ratified again.’

*Bṛhaspati* (8.22, 23).—‘A document executed by a mad man, an idiot, an
infant, one who has absconded through fear of the King, a bashful
person, or one tormented by fear,—is not invalidated (by failure to
produce its author).—But as a rule a document executed by a dying
person, or enemy, one oppressed with fear, a suffering person, a woman,
one intoxicated or distressed by a calamity, or at night, by fraud or by
force,—does not hold good.’
