+++
title = "166 ग्रहीता यदि"

+++
**(verses 8.166-167)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.45, 46).—‘Any debt that may have been contracted for
the benefit of the family, on the death or during the absence of the
master of the house, by such members as have not become divided, shall
be paid by all those who inherit the property. But the woman shall not
pay the debt contracted by her husband or son; nor the father, the debt
contracted by the son,—except when the debt is one that has been
contracted for the benefit of the family.’

*Nārada* (1, 2, 3, 10-18).—‘The father being dead, it is incumbent on
the sons to pay his debt, each according to his share, if they are
divided; if they are not divided, the debt must be discharged by that
son who becomes the manager of the family-estate. That debt which has
been contracted by an undivided paternal uncle, brother, or mother, for
the benefit of the household, must be discharged wholly by the heirs. A
father may not pay the debt of his son; but the son must pay the debt
contracted by his father; excepting those that may have been contracted
from love or anger, or for spirituous liquor, games or bailments. Such
debts of a son as have been contracted by him by his father's orders, or
for the maintenance of the family, or in a precarious situation,—must be
paid by the father. What has been spent for the household by a pupil,
apprentice, slave, woman, menial, or agent, must he paid by the head of
the household. When the debtor is dead, and the expense has been
incurred for the benefit of the family, the debt must he paid by his
relations,—even though they he separated from him in interests. The
father, uncle, or eldest brother, having gone abroad, the son (or nephew
or younger brother) is not bound to pay his debt before the lapse of
twenty years. Every single coparcener is liable for debts contracted by
another coparcener, if they were contracted while the coparceners wore
all alive and undivided. But after their death, the son of one is not
hound to pay the debt of another. The wife need not pay the debt
contracted by her husband, nor one contracted by her son, except if it
had been promised by her, or contracted in common with her husband. A
sonless widow, and one enjoined by her dying husband (to pay his debt),
must pay it. Or it may be paid by one who inherits the estate—liability
for debts going with the right of succession. A debt contracted by the
wife shall never hind the husband, unless it had been contracted at a
time when the husband was in distress. Household expenses are
indispensably necessary.’

*Bṛhaspati* (11. 49-52). The father’s debt, on being proved, must he
paid by the sons as if it were their own; the grand-father’s debts must
be paid by his son’s sons, without interest; but the son of the grandson
need not pay it. When a debt has been incurred for the benefit of the
household, by an uncle, brother, son, wife, slave, pupil or dependant,
it must be paid by the head of the family. Sons shall not be made to pay
a debt incurred by their father for wine, for losses at play, for idle
gifts, for promises made under the influence of love or hate, or for
suretyship; nor the balance of a lino or toll. The liability for debts
devolves on the successor to the estate, when the son is involved in
calamity.’

*Viṣṇu* (6.27-39).—‘If he who contracted the debt should die, or become
a renunciate, or remain abroad for twenty years,—that debt shall be
discharged by his sons or grandsons;—but not by remoter descendants
against their will. He who takes the assets of a man, leaving or not
leaving male issue, must pay the sum due by him; and so mush he who has
the care of the widow left by one who had no assets. A woman shall not
be compelled to pay the debt of her husband or son; nor the husband or
the son, the debt of his wife or mother; nor the father, that of his
son. A debt contracted by parceners shall be paid by any one of them
that may be alive; and so shall the debt of the father be paid by any
one of the brothers, before partition; but after partition, they shall
pay severally, according to their shares of the inheritance. A debt
contracted by the wife of a herdsman, wine-distiller, public-dancer,
washer or hunter shall be discharged by the husband.... The house-holder
must pay that debt which may have been contracted by any person, for the
behoof of the family.’

*Katyāyana* (Vivādaratnakara, pp. 50 and 54).—‘If the father is an
invalid, even though alive,—or if he has been away from the country for
twenty years,—the debts contracted by him should be paid by his sons.
The debt contracted by the family, either during illness, or during a
calamity, or in connection with the daughter’s marriage, or a Śrāddha,
should be paid by the head of the family.’
