+++
title = "189 चौरैर् हृतम्"

+++
*Yājñavalkya* (2.66).—‘The depositary should not be made to pay
anything, if the deposit has been taken away by the King, or by
accidents or by thieves. When the depositor asks for it, if it is not
restored, and is found to be lost, the depositary shall be made to pay
its value and also a fine equal to it.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 663).—‘Where a deposit has been destroyed by
anarchy or by accidents, it is held to have been lost to the depositor.’

*Nārada* (2.12).—‘If the deposit has been stolen by thieves, carried
away by water, or burnt by fire, it need not he restored, unless the
depositary should have appropriated some portion of it.’

*Nārada* (2.9).—‘If a deposit is lost, together with the property of the
depositary, the loss shall he the depositor’s. The same rule shall
obtain if the loss has been caused by accidents or by the King; unless
the depositary shall have acted fraudulently.’

Do. (2.8).—‘If the depositary derives profit from a deposit, by using it
without the consent of the depositor, he shall be fined, and shall
restore the profit with interest, to the depositor.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.10-12).—‘When a deposit is destroyed, together with the
goods of the depositary, by the act of God or of the King, the
depositary is not to blame. If the depositary should suffer the deposit
to be destroyed by his want of care or indifference, or should refuse to
restore it on being asked for it, he shall he made to pay the value of
it with interest. Should the depositary secure any advantage for himself
through the article deposited with him, he shall be fined by the King
and compelled to pay its value with the interest.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 663).—‘If the deposit has been destroyed by
the fault of some one, that person should be made to pay the value of
the deposit along with interest.’
