+++
title = "198 अवहार्यो भवेच्"

+++
**(verses 8.198-199)**

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 95).—‘When the rightful owner has found the article
that he had lost or which had been stolen from him, he shall have the
man in possession of it arrested by the Judge. If the exigencies of time
and place do not permit of this procedure, he may himself arrest the man
and take him to the Judge;—the Judge shall ask the man in possession
—*From where did you obtain this thing*? If the man explains the manner
of his acquisition, but fails to produce the man who had sold it to him,
he should be let off after he has surrendered the property; if the
vendor is produced, the vendor should he made to pay the price obtained
to the purchaser, and also a penalty for theft.’

*Nārada* (7.4, 5).—‘The purchaser must not make a secret of the way in
which he came by a chattel purchased by him. He becomes free from blame
if he can point out the way in which the chattel was acquired by him. In
any other case, he is equally guilty with the vendor and shall suffer
the punishment of a thief. The vendor shall restore the property to the
rightful owner, and shall pay to the purchaser the price for which he
had sold it; besides that, he shall pay a fine to the King.’

*Bṛhaspati* (13.3, 4).—‘When the vendor has been produced and cast in
the suit, the judge shall make him pay the price to the buyer and a fine
to the King, and to restore the property to the owner. When the former
owner comes forward and makes good his claim to the thing sold, the
vendor shall be produced by the purchaser, who thereupon becomes
cleared.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 202).—‘When the purchaser has shown the
person from whom he had purchased the article, he shall not be blamed in
any way; after that, the dispute shall he between that person and the
rightful owner of the lost article.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.168, 169, 170).—‘If one’s property has been sold by
another person, the property shall be restored to him; the purchaser
becomes guilty if he cannot produce the seller; and he shall be dealt
with as a *thief*, if he bought the thing either in secret, or at a very
low price, or at an improper time. If a man comes by his property that
had been lost or stolen, he should have the possessor arrested; or if
the time or place does not permit of this, he shall arrest him himself
and produce him before the court; the man becomes absolved from blame on
producing the seller; and from the seller, the owner recovers his
property,—the purchaser, the price that he had paid, and the King, a
fine.’

*Bṛhaspati* (13.11)—‘That should be regarded as *Fraudulent Purchase*
which is made at an unreasonably low price, or in the interior of a
house, or outside of the village, or at night, or in secret, or from a
dishonest person.’
