+++
title = "201 विक्रयाद् यो"

+++
*Bṛhaspati* (13.7, 8, 10).—‘When a purchase has been made before an
assembly of merchants, the king’s officers also being aware of it,—but
from a vendor whose habitation is unknown, or when the purchaser is
dead,—the owner may recover his own property by paying half the price
tendered; the custom in that case being that one half of the value is
lost to each of the two parties. When a man purchases a commodity at a
fair price, and the purchase has been announced to the King, there is no
wrong about it.’

*Bṛhaspati* (12.3, 4).—‘When the vendor has been produced and has been
cast in the suit, the judge shall cause him to pay the price to the
buyer, a fine to the King, and to restore the property to the owner.
When the former owner comes forward and makes good his claim to the
article purchased, the vendor shall be produced by the purchaser; by
doing so, the purchaser may clear himself.’

*Nārada* (7.2-5)—‘No blame attaches to a sale effected in public; but a
clandestine sale is viewed in the same light as theft, according to law.
The purchaser must not make a secret of the way in which he came by a
chattel purchased by him. He becomes free from blame if he can point out
the way in which the chattel was acquired by him. In any other case he
is equally guilty with the vendor, and shall suffer the punishment of a
thief. The vendor shall restore the property to the rightful owner, and
shall pay to the buyer the price for which it was sold to him; besides
that, he shall pay a fine to the King.’
