+++
title = "212 धर्मार्थं येन"

+++
*Ārthaśāstra* (6.94).—‘In some cases the resumption of a gift is
permitted; if one has given away his entire property, or his wife and
son, or his own self, it should be restored to him; if a gift has been
promised to a certain person under the impression that he is deserving
of it, it may be resumed on his being found to be undeserving; u (?) if
a gift was promised to a man for the purpose of helping him in the
carrying on of such meritorious work as the tending of cows and the
like, it may be resumed if he is found to be using it in stealing,
adultery and such acts; if it has been promised to a man under the
impression that he has rendered help to the giver, it may be resumed if
the man is found either to have done him no good or to have actually
done him harm; if a gift has been promised by virtue of certain special
qualifications in the recipient, it may be resumed if he is not found to
possess those qualifications. Clever judges shall permit such resumption
of gifts in such a manner as neither the giver nor the recipient may be
hit hard.’

*Nārada* (14.4 *et seq*.).—‘A deposit, a pledge, joint property, a son,
wife, the entire property of one having offspring, and what has been
promised to another man:—these have been declared to be inalienable by
one even in the worst plight...... The price paid for merchandise,
wages, a present offered for amusement, a gift made from affection, or
from gratitude, or for sexual intercourse with a woman, and a respectful
gift,—these are valid gifts. The following are invalid gifts: what has
been given under the influence of fear, anger, hatred, sorrow or pain;
or as a bribe, or in jest, or fraudulently, under false pretences; or by
a child, or by a fool, or by a person not bis own master, or by one
distressed, or by one intoxicated, or by one insane, or in consideration
of a reward, thinking *this man will do me some service*;— and so is
invalid what has been given from ignorance to an unworthy man thought to
be worthy, or for a purpose thought to be virtuous. The donee who covets
invalid gifts and accepts them through avarice,—and the donor of what
ought not to be given,—both deserve punishment.’

*Bṛhaspati* (16.2, 8-11).—‘That which may not be given is of eight
kinds: joint property, son, wife, pledges, one’s entire property, a
deposit, wealth, what has been borrowed for use and what has been
promised to another. The following eight are recognised as valid
gifts:—wages for pleasure derived, price of merchandise, fee paid to or
for a damsel, present to a benefactor, present through reverence,
kindness or affection. What has been given by one angry or resenting an
injury, or through inadvertence, or by one distressed, or by a junior,
mad man, a terrified person, one intoxicated or overaged, or outcast or
idiot, or one afflicted with grief or illness,—or what is given in
jest;—all these have been declared to be void gifts. When anything has
been given through desire for reward, or to an unworthy person mistaken
for a worthy one, or for an immoral purpose,—the donor may resume the
gift.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākāra, p. 129, p. 132, p. 135).—‘A man may give
away his entire property over and above what may be necessary for the
maintenance of his family, excepting his house. If a man has promised a
gift to a Brāhmaṇa of his own accord, if he refuses to give it he should
he made to pay it, and also pay the first amercement. A man may resume
what he may have given under the influence of love or anger, or when he
was not a free agent, or when he was distressed. Or one made by a
eunuch, an intoxicated person, or under a misapprehension, or in jest.
If a bribe has been promised for some work, it should never be given,
even if the work may be accomplished.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2-175, 176).—‘With the exception of the wife and son,
everything may he given away, in consonance with the interests of the
family; if a man has offspring, he should not give away his entire
property; nor may he give to one person what has been promised to
another. The acceptance of a gift should he public, specially in the
ease of immovable property; on having given or promised a gift, one
should not resume it.’

*Gautama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 133).—‘Even though he may have promised a
gift, he shall not give it if the recipient is found to be unrighteous.’
