+++
title = "215 भृतो नार्तो"

+++
**(verses 8.215-217)  
**

*Āpastamba* (2.28.2-3).—‘A servant in tillage who abandons his work
shall be flogged. The same punishment shall be inflicted on a herdsman
leaving his work.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.153-154).—‘A hired workman who abandons his work before the
term has expired shall pay the whole amount of the stipulated wages to
his employer; and he shall pay 100 *Paṇas* to the King.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.193-198).—‘If a workman abandons his work after having
received his wages, he shall refund double the amount received by him.
If he abandons it before he has received any wages, he should pay to the
employer the amount of the stipulated wages; but workmen may be allowed
to retain their tools. If the employer has engaged a workman without
settling his wages, he should be made by the King to pay the tenth part
of the profit that he may have made in trade, in cattle or in
agriculture, through the labours of that workman. In a case where the
workman has worked beyond the stipulated time and place,—if this
additional work decreases the profits of the employer, the latter may
give him such wages as he likes for this additional work; but if it has
tended to increase his profits, he shall give more. A man shall be paid
his wages in accordance with the amount of work done: and neither party
shall be stingy (of labour or payment); if the workman is sparing in his
labour, he shall receive only what the employer may give him. In the
case of a carrier, if he destroys the articles he is carrying, through
neglect,—and not through any act of God or of the King—he should be made
to replace it; if the employer puts obstacles in the way of his
starting, he shall pay double the amount of the stipulated wages. If the
carrier abandons the work after he has just started, he should be made
to pay the seventh part of the stipulated wages; the fourth part, if he
abandons it on the way; the whole of it if he abandons it after going
half way of the journey. If the employer dismisses the carrier, he
should be made to pay in the same proportion.’

*Nārada* (5.22).—‘Hired servants are of three kinds: highest, middlemost
and lowest; the wages due for their labour are fixed in proportion to
their skill and to the value of their services.’

Do. (6.2, 3, 5-9).—‘A master shall regularly pay wages to the servant
hired by him, whether it be at the commencement, at the middle, or at
the end of his work, just as he had agreed to do. When the amount of the
wages has not been fixed, the servant of a trader, a herdsman and an
agricultural labourer shall take a tenth part of the profit derived from
the trade, the product of the cows and of the grain respectively. If one
fails to perform such work as he had promised to do, he shall be
compelled to perform it, after first paying him the wages. If he does
not perform it after receiving the wages, he must pay back twice the
amount of the wages received. One who abandons merchandise which he had
agreed to convey to its destination, shall give a sixth part of the
wages. An employer who does not pay the wages that he had agreed to give
shall forfeit those wages together with interest. A merchant who does
not take a conveyance or beasts for draught of burden, after having
hired them, shall be made to pay a fourth part of the hire, and the
whole, if he leaves them half-way. And so shall a earner who fails to
transport the goods entrusted to him forfeit his wages. He shall be
compelled to pay twice the amount of his wages if he raises difficulties
at the time of starting. When the merchandise has been damaged by the
carrier’s fault, he shall have to make good every loss,—not including
such losses as may have been caused by fate (accident) or by the King.’

*Bṛhaspati* (16.8-20).—‘The servant for gain or pay is declared to be of
many sorts; another is servant for a share of the grain...—A servant
engaged for a day, a month, half-month, a six-month, two months, or a
year, must do the work which he promised to do and receive the
stipulated wages. A servant for a share of the grain is of two
kinds—serving either a husbandman or an owner of cattle; ho shall
receive a share of the grain produced, or of the milk; a third or fifth
of the produce shall be given to the cultivator of the soil as his
share. Let that cultivator to whom food and clothing are given take a
fifth part of the crops; and let him who serves in consideration of the
profit take a third part of the grain produced. Should a hired servant
fail in the performance of ever so small a part of his employer’s work,
he forfeits his wages, and may be sued in court for his offence. When a
servant does not perform his work after having received his wages,
though he is able to work,... he shall be compelled to pay twice as much
as his wages as a fine to the King, and to refund the wages to the
employer. he who has promised to do work and does not perform it, shall
he compelled to do so by forcible means even; and if, through obstinacy,
such a servant should still not do it as engaged for, he shall be fined
eight *Kṛṣṇalas*, and his wages shall not he given to him. When a
servant commanded by his employer does any improper act for the benefit
of his employer, the latter shall be held responsible for it. When a
master does not pay wages for the labour stipulated, after the work has
been performed, he shall be compelled by the King to pay it, and a
proportionate fine besides. A man hired for attendance on milch cows
shall receive the whole milk every eighth day.’
