+++
title = "219 यो ग्राम-देश-सङ्घानाम्"

+++
**(verses 8.219-221)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (5.168).—‘He who violates the established rule shall be
banished.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.186-192).—‘If one misappropriates the property of a
corporate body, or breaks the conditions of agreement, the King shall
confiscate his entire property and banish him from the kingdom. What is
declared by the members of the corporation should be obeyed by all
component members; if any of them act contrariwise, he should be fined
the first amercement....... This same rule applies to guilds, trading
companies, corporations of heretics and other corporate bodies.’

*Nārada* (10.2-7).—‘Among heretics, followers of the Veda, guilds,
corporations, troops, assemblages and other associations, the King shall
maintain their usages and customs—whatever be their laws, their duties,
their rules regarding attendance, and the particular inodes of
livelihood prescribed for them, that the

King shall approve of. The King shall prevent them from undertaking such
acts as would be detrimental to the interests, either of their own
associations or of the King himself, or despicable in their very nature.
Mixed assemblages, unlawful wearing of arms and mutual attacks among
these persons shall not be tolerated by the King. Those who cause
dissension among the members of an association, shall undergo punishment
of a specially severe kind.’

*Bṛhaspati* (17.5, 10-16).—‘A compact formed among villages, companies
of artisans, and associations is called an *agreement*; such an
agreement must be observed both in times of distress and for acts of
piety. Two, three or five persons shall be appointed as advisers to the
association; their advice shall be taken by the villagers, companies,
corporations and other fellowships. When a stipulation has been entered
in a document in the form, “The construction of a house or a shed,
temple...... shall be undertaken by us in proportionate shares,”—that is
lawful agreement. Such an agreement must be kept by all. he who fails in
his agreement, though able to perform it, shall be punished with
confiscation of his entire property and by banishment from the town. For
one who has fallen out with his associates, or neglects his duties by
them, a fine is ordained, amounting to six *Niṣkas* of four *Suvarṇas*
each. He who injures the joint stock, or insults a Brāhmaṇa learned in
the three Vedas, or breaks the mutual agreement, shall be banished from
the town. An acrimonious or malicious person, and one who causes
dissension or does violent acts, or who is inimically disposed towards
the company, association or the King, shall be banished instantly from
the town. Whatever is obtained by one man shall belong to all in common;
whether it has been acquired a six-month or a month ago, it shall be
divided in due proportion.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, pp. 793-795).—‘One who is addicted to acts of
violence, one who sows dissension among the members of the corporation,
and one who ruins the property of the corporation,—all these should be
extirpated, after being proclaimed as such;—so says Bhṛgu. Whatever has
been acquired for the corporation, belongs to all the members in equal
shares.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 180).—‘Whatever laws may have been
prescribed for associations, the members thereof shall do all acts
according to them, remaining firm in their duties.’
