+++
title = "222 क्रीत्वा विक्रीय"

+++
**(verses 8.222-223)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (2.177).—‘Grains should be tested within ten days of
purchase; metals within a day; beasts of burden within five days: gems,
within seven days; female slaves, within a month; milch cattle, within
three days; male slaves, within a fortnight, \[and the sale may be
rescinded within these specified periods\].’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 91).—‘Having sold a commodity, if the vendor fails to
hand it over he should be fined 12 *Paṇas*; except when there is some
defect in the commodity itself, or when some sudden calamity befalls
him, or when the price agreed upon is excessively low, by reason of the
vendor being in a distressed state of mind. Merchants may he granted one
night for reconsidering their purchase; cultivators, three nights;
cattle-tenders, five nights; persons of the mixed and higher castes,
seven nights, in the case of the selling of the means of their
livelihood. In the case of commodities liable to damage by lapse of
time, rescission of sale may he permitted only to such an extent as may
not spoil the commodities concerned. After having made a purchase, if
the buyer refuses to accept the article, he should be fined 12 *Paṇas*,
except when there are defects in the commodity itself, or when some
sudden calamity has befallen him, or when the price agreed upon is
excessively high, paid by him on account of the distressed state of his
mind. Rescission by the buyer also should be permitted in the same
manner as in the case of the vendor.’

*Nārada* (8.4-9).—‘If a man sells property for a certain price, and does
not hand it over to the purchaser, he shall have to pay its produce, if
it is immovable, and the profits arising on it, if it is movable
property. If there has been a fall in the market-value of the article in
question in the interval, the purchaser shall receive the article
itself, and together with it the difference (in point of value). This
rule applies to those who are inhabitants of the same place; but to
those who travel abroad, the profits arising from dealing in foreign
countries shall be made over as well. If the article sold should have
been injured, or destroyed by fire, or carried off, the loss shall be
charged to the seller, because he did not deliver it immediately after
the sale. When a man shows one thing which is faultless but delivers
another thing which has a blemish, ho shall be compelled to pay twice
its value to the purchaser, and an equal amount as fine to the King. So
when a man sells something to one person, and afterwards delivers it to
another person, he shall be compelled to pay twice its value to the
purchaser and a fine to the King. When a purchaser does not accept an
article purchased by himself, which is delivered to him by the vendor,
the vendor commits no wrong in selling it to another person.’

*Nārada* (9.2-6, 16).—‘When a purchaser, after having purchased an
article for a certain price, thinks he has made a foolish bargain, he
may return it to the vendor on the same day, in an undamaged condition.
When the purchaser returns it on the second day, he shall lose a
thirtieth part of the price. He shall lose twice as much on the third
day. After that time, the purchaser must keep it. The purchaser shall
examine an article before purchasing it, in order to find out its good
and bad qualities; that which has been approved by him after close
examination, cannot be returned to the vendor. Milch cattle may be
examined for three days; beasts of burden, for five days; and in the
ease of precious stones, pearls and coral, the period of examination may
extend over seven days. Bipeds shall be examined within a fortnight; a
female within twice that time; all sorts of grain, within ten days; iron
and clothes within a single day...... A merchant who is acquainted with
the qualities of the merchandise he deals in must not annul a purchase
after having once made it; he ought to know all about the profit and
loss on merchandise and its origin.’

*Bṛhaspati* (18.3-6).—‘The examiner shall examine the article himself
and show it to others; when, after examining and approving it, he has
accepted it, he is not at liberty to return it. The foolish man who
sells an article, though acquainted with its defects, shall have to pay
twice its value to the purchaser and a fine of the same amount to the
King. What has been sold by one intoxicated or insane, or at a very low
price, or under the impulse of fear, or by one not his own master, or by
an idiot, shall be relinquished by the purchaser; or it may be recovered
from him by forcible means. Within a certain period, if a defect should
be discovered anywhere in the commodity purchased, it shall he returned
to the vendor and the purchaser shall recover the price.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 191).—‘If a man, after having purchased
an article, refuses to take it,—or if after taking it, does not return
it undamaged,—he shall recover the price paid for it, after paying the
tenth part of it to the vendor. This shall he done within ten days of
the transaction; after that there can he no rescission of the sale.’

Do. (Do., p. 197).—‘If a man, after having purchased a milch cattle or
such things,—but before actual delivery—returns it undamaged, within
time, he should pay to the vendor the tenth part of the price. If he
repents it after he has taken delivery, he should pay the sixth part of
the price.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 198).—‘Grasses, wood, bricks, threads,
grains, wines, liquids, clothes, baser metals and gold, shall he
examined at the time of the transaction only.’
