+++
title = "240 पथि क्षेत्रे"

+++
*Nārada* (11.28, 29, 35).—‘When crops have been destroyed by cows or
other cattle crossing a fence, the herdsman deserves punishment in that
case, unless he should have done his best to keep the cattle off. When
the crops have been entirely destroyed to the very roots, the owner of
them may claim a corresponding quantity of grain as damages; the
herdsman shall be corporally punished: and the owner of the cattle shall
pay a fine. When cows, straying through the fault of their keeper, have
entered a field, no punishment shall be inflicted on their owner; the
herdsman alone being punishable.’

*Gautama* (12.19-20).—‘If damage is done by cattle, the responsibility
lies on the owner; but if the cattle were attended by a herdsman, then
it falls on the latter.’

*Āpastamba* (2.28.5).—‘If cattle, leaving their stable, eat the crops of
other persons, then the owner of the crops, or the King’s servants, may
make them lean by impounding them; hut this punishment shall not he
over-done.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.140-146).—‘If a she-buffalo damages crops, her keeper shall
he fined eight *māṣas*; if she has been without a keeper, her owner
shall pay the fine. For mischief done by a horse or a camel, or an ass,
the fine shall he the same. For damage done by a cow, it shall he half;
half of that again in the case of the goat or the sheep. For cattle
abiding in the field after eating the crops, the fine shall he double;
and in every case the owner of the field shall receive the value of the
crops that have been destroyed.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.162).—‘In the case of a field on the roadside, or
adjacent to the pasture-land of the village, if cattle is allowed to
graze unintentionally, there is no offence; but if it is done
intentionally, the man deserves punishment like the thief.’

*Uśanas* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 232).—‘If a man asks for compensation for
the crops that may haves been grazed by a cow, his Pitṛs and deities do
not accept his offerings.’
