+++
title = "241 क्षेत्रेष्व् अन्येषु"

+++
*Gautama* (12.21-26).—‘If the damage was done in an unenclosed field
near the road, the responsibility falls on the herdsman and on the owner
of the field. Five *māṣas* form the fine to be paid for damage done by a
cow; six for a camel or an ass; ten for a horse or a buffalo; two for
each goat or sheep. If the entire crop has been destroyed, the value of
the whole must be paid in addition to the fine.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 60).—‘In the case of camels and buffaloes running away
after grazing in the reserved pasture-land, one-fourth of a *Paṇa*
should be realised; for cows, horses and asses, one-eighth; in that of
small cattle, one-sixteenth. If they sit on the land after grazing, the
fines shall be double; if they abide on the land, it will be quadruple.
In the case of crops being grazed by cattle, the damage done shall be
computed and double the amount of the value shall be the amount of the
fine inflicted.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.159-160).—‘If crops are damaged by the she-buffalo,
there shall be a fine of eight *māṣas*; half of his, if by the cow; and
half of that again, if by goat or sheep; if they have sat in the field
after grazing, the fine shall be double.’

Do. (2.161).—‘The owner of the field shall receive the value of as much
crop as may have been damaged; the keeper of the cattle should be
beaten, and the owner should be punished with the aforesaid fine.’

*Nārada* (11.38-39).—‘When a man claims damages for crops grazed by
cattle, that quantity of grain should be restored to him by the owner of
the cattle which may have been consumed by the cattle in the estimation
of the neighbours the cows shall be given up to the owner and the grain
to the husbandman. In the same way a fine shall be imposed on the
herdsman when crops have been trodden down by cows.’

Do. (11.31).—‘For damage done by a cow, he shall inflict a fine of one
*māṣa*; two *māṣas* in the case of a she-buffalo; half a *māṣa* in the
case of a goat trespassing with its young.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 235).—‘The owner of the cow should be
made to pay a quarter *Paṇa*; of the she-buffalo, two quarters; of
goats, sheep and calves, one quarter is the fine ordained.’

*Śāṅkha-Likhīta* (Do.).—‘In the case of all calves, one *māṣa*; ten in
that of the she-buffalo; sixteen in that of asses and camels; and four,
in that of goats and sheep.’
