+++
title = "242 अनिर्दशाहाङ् गाम्"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (5.150).—‘If the damage has been done by bulls that have been
set at liberty, or by a cow shortly after her calving (there is no
offence).’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.163).—‘The Big Bull, cattle consecrated and let loose,
a cow newly calved, stray strange cattle, or those perturbed by
visitations of the King or of Fate,—these shall ho set at liberty
(without punishment), even though they he accompanied by the keeper (at
the time of grazing).’

*Uśanas* (Aparārka, p. 771).—‘Elephants and horses are not to he
punished; as also a strange cow, or one newly calved; or one that has
strayed from the herd, and all cows at the time of rejoicings or
Śrāddhas.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 772).—‘In the matter of punishing the grazing of
cattle, of the highest, lowest and middlemost kinds, the King shall
inflict fines only in the event of the owner of the field complaining
about it.’

*Nārada* (11.30, 32, 33).—‘A cow within ten days of her calving, a big
bull, a horse and an elephant shall he kept off carefully. The owner of
any one of them is not liable to punishment for doing any damage. The
owners of elephants and horses shall not pay any fine. Impunity is
likewise granted to the owner of the strayed cow, of one that has
recently calved, or of one that is uncontrollable;—as also the owner of
one that has lost her way, or broken down, or stuck in the marsh, or a
bull marked by the sign of consecration.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 60).—‘The village-bull, the consecrated bull, the cow
within ten days of calving, old hulls and breeding bulls shall not be
punished.’
