+++
title = "267 शतम् ब्राह्मणम्"

+++
**(verses 8.267-270)  
**

*Gautama* (12. 1, 8, 10-13).—‘A Śūdra who intentionally reviles
twice-born men, by criminal abuse, or criminally assaults them with
blows, shall be deprived of the limb with which he has offended. A
Kṣatriya shall he fined one hundred, if he abuses a Brāhmaṇa. A Vaiśya
who abuses a Brāhmaṇa shall pay one and a half (times as much as the
Kṣatriya). A Brāhmaṇa abusing a Kṣatriya shall pay 50; half of that for
abusing a Vaiśya; nothing for abusing a Śūdra.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.206.207).—‘The fine is half for reviling one lower than
one’s self, double, for reviling women and superior persons; thus shall
the fine he inflicted in accordance with the superiority or inferiority
of the castes concerned. If a person abuses another belonging to a
higher caste, he shall be fined double and treble (of 50 *Paṇas*); if
one abuses another belonging to a lower caste, the fine shall be reduced
by half of the afore-mentioned.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 104).—‘Among the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya, the Vaiśya,
the Śūdra and the Caṇḍāla,—if the succeeding reviles the preceding, the
fine shall be 3 *Paṇas*;—if the preceding reviles the succeeding, it
shall be 2 *Paṇas*.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.23, 33-35-38).—‘If the Śūdra uses abusive language, his
tongue shall be cut off;—for using insulting language, he shall be fined
a hundred *kārṣāpaṇas*;—for insulting a man by using bad language
regarding his mother, the highest amercement;—for abusing a man of his
own caste, he shall be fined twelve *Paṇas*; for abusing a man of a
lower caste, six *Paṇas*;—for insulting a member of the highest caste,
or of his own caste (at the same time), the same fine is ordained;—or if
he only returns his insult, a fine amounting to three *kārṣāpaṇas*.’

*Āpastamba* (2.27.14).—‘The tongue of a Śūdra who speaks evil of a
virtuous person, belonging to one of the first three castes, shall be
cut out.’

*Nārada* (15-16.15-17, 22, 25).—‘A Kṣatriya who reviles a Brāhmaṇa must
pay one hundred *Paṇas* as fine; a Vaiśya must pay one and a half
hundred, or two hundred; a Śūdra deserves corporal punishment. A
Brāhmaṇa shall he fined fifty *Paṇas* for calumniating a Kṣatriya; in
the case of a Vaiśya, the fine shall he half of fifty; in the case of a
Śūdra, it shall be twelve *Paṇas*. When a twice-born person offends
against a member of his own caste, he shall pay twelve *Paṇas* as fine.
When he utters calumnies which ought never to be uttered, the fine shall
be twice as high. A once-born man who insults members of a twice-born
caste with gross invectives, shall have his tongue cut out... With
whatever limb a low-caste man offends against a Brāhmaṇa, that very limb
of his shall be cut off; such shall be the atonement of his crime.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 251).—‘A Brāhmaṇa abusing a
Kṣatriya should be fined 100; 50 for abusing a Vaiśya and ‘25 for
abusing a Śūdra.’

*Bṛhaspāti* (20.6-11).—‘When persons equal in caste and qualities abuse
one another, the punishment ordained for them is thirteen *Paṇas* and a
half. For a Brāhmaṇa abusing a Kṣatriya, the fine shall be a
half-hundred; for abusing a Vaiśya, half of fifty; for abusing a Śūdra,
twelve and half. This punishment has been ordained for abusing a
virtuous Śūdra who has committed no wrong; no offence is imputable to a
Brāhmaṇa for abusing a Śūdra devoid of virtue. A Vaiśya shall he fined a
hundred *Paṇas* for reviling a Kṣatriya; a Kṣatriya reviling a Vaiśya
shall have to pay half of that amount as fine. In the case of a Kṣatriya
reviling a Śūdra, the fine shall be twenty *Paṇas*; in the case of a
Vaiśya, double that amount. The Śūdra shall be compelled to pay the fine
of the first amercement for abusing a Vaiśya; the middle amercement for
abusing a Kṣatriya 5 and the highest amercement for abusing a Brāhmaṇa.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīvādaratnākara, p. 248).—‘For abusing a person of a
higher caste, the offender should propitiate him and pay a fine of three
*kārṣāpaṇas*;—on insulting a man of the same caste as oneself the fine
is twelve *kārṣāpanas*; and twenty-four, for insulting a person of
superior qualifications.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 251).—‘For a low-caste man abusing one of a higher
caste, the fine is eight *Purāṇas* (Purāṇa being equal to 32 silver
*kṛṣṇalas*).’
