+++
title = "282 अवनिष्ठीवतो दर्पाद्"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (5.21-22).—‘If he spits on him, he shall lose both lips;—if he
breaks wind against him, his hind-parts.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 106).—‘If he touches one with unclean limbs, or with
the feet, or with spittings, he shall be fined 6 *Paṇas*; if with vomits
or urine or ordure, 12 *Paṇas*; if he touches the body above the navel,
the double of these; if on the head, then four times. This among equals.
If one does all this to a superior, then the fine shall be double; half
only if it is done inadvertently.’

*Nārada* (15-16. 27).—‘If, through arrogance, he spits on a superior,
the King shall have both his lips to be cut off; if he makes water on
him, the penis: if he breaks wind against him, the buttocks.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.213-214).—‘If one touches another person with ashes, or
mud, or dust,—the fine shall be 10 *Paṇa*.s; if he touches him with an
unclean hand, or with the foot, or with spittings, the fine shall be
double of that. This refers to the case of equals; if the offence is
against another man’s wife, or against superior persons, the fine shall
be double; if against inferiors, it shall be half; there is to be no
punishment if all this is done under the influence of liquor and such
things.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 813).—‘The fine is to be quadrupled if one
touches another person with vomitings, urine or ordure; and sixfold if
the middle of the body is touched; and eightfold, if the head is
touched.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 266).—‘If one of a lower caste catches
hold of the neck, or breasts or hair or mouth of a person of the higher
caste, the fine shall be 30; 63, for uprooting his hair and for
threatening him.’
