+++
title = "284 त्वग्भेदकः शतम्"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (5.66-72).—‘If he causes pain to him, without fetching blood, he
shall pay 32 *Paṇas*; for fetching blood, 64;—for mutilating or injuring
a hand, or a foot, or a tooth,—and for slitting an ear, or the nose,—the
second amercement. For rendering a man unable to move about, or to oat,
or to speak,—or for striking him violently,—the same punishment is
ordained. For wounding or breaking an eye, or the neck, or an arm, or a
hone, or a shoulder, the highest amercement. For striking out both eyes
of a man, the King shall confine him and not release him from the jail
as long as he lives;—or he shall order him to be mutilated in the same
way.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.218-220).—‘If one causes pain with wood and other
things, without fetching blood, he should ho made to pay a fine of 32
*Paṇas*; on fetching blood, the double of that. If he breaks a hand, or
a foot, or a tooth, or slits the ear or the nose, or reopens a wound, or
beats him nearly to death,—the middle amercement. On incapacitating him
from moving, eating or speaking, also for piercing the eyes and other
organs, or for breaking the shoulder, or the arms or the thighs, the
middle amercement.’

*Nārada* (15-16.29).—‘If a man breaks the skin of an equal, or fetches
blood from him, he shall be fined a hundred *Paṇas*; if he cuts the
flesh, 6 *Niṣkas*; if he breaks a bone, ho shall be banished.’

*Bṛhaspati* (22.720).—‘For injuring a person with bricks, stones or a
wooden club, he shall he fined two *Māṣas*; double of this, if blood
flows. For tearing the skin, the lowest amercement shall be inflicted;
for tearing the flesh, the middle amercement; for breaking a hone, the
highest amercement; for killing, capital punishment. For breaking the
oar, the nose or hand, or injuring teeth, or feet,—the middle
amercement; and double of that for cutting off any of those limbs. He
who injures a limb or divides it, shall be compelled to pay the expense
of curing it.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 107).—‘On hurting a person, without fetching blood,
with wood, stones, bricks, iron-stick, or ropes—the fine shall be 24
*Paṇas*; double of that if blood is fetched. The lowest amercement for
beating a man nearly to death, without fetching blood; as also for
disabling a hand or foot. For breaking the hand or foot, or for tearing
the nose or the ear, or for opening a wound, the same punishment. For
breaking the thigh or the neck or the eyes, or making one unable to
speak or move or eat,—the middle amercement; also the expenses for
effecting a cure. If the man happen to die, the culprit should be tried
as a heinous criminal.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 265).—‘For striking a man with bricks,
stones or wooden sticks, the fine is two *Māṣas*; double of this if
blood is fetched; for cutting of the ear, the lip, the nose, the eye,
the tongue, the penis or the hand,—the highest amercement; and for
piercing these, the middle amercement.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 266).—‘If a low-caste man breaks the head,
or ears or any limb of a person of the higher castes, he shall be fined
200 *Purāṇas*; for striking him with the foot, his feet shall be cut
off, or he shall he fined 500.’
