+++
title = "314 राजा स्तेनेन"

+++
**(verses 8.314-315)**

[\[ *See* Manu
11.100-101.\]](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc201979.html#comparative-notes)

*Gautama* (12.48).—‘A man who has stolen gold shall approach the King,
with flying hair, holding a club in his hand, and proclaim his deed.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1.16-17).—‘A thief shall go to the King with flying
hair, carrying on his shoulder a club of *sindhuka* wood, and say
‘strike me with this.’ Then the King shall strike him. They quote the
following verse:—“A thief shall go to the King carrying a club on his
shoulder and say to him, *Punish me with this, O King*.”’

*Āpastamba* (1.25.4).—‘A thief shall go to the King with flying hair,
carrying a club on his shoulder and tell him what he has done. The King
shall give him a blow with that club. If the thief dies, his sin is
expiated.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.41).—‘If a man has stolon gold belonging to a Brāhmaṇa he
shall run with flying hair to the King, exclaiming “Ho! I am a thief,
Sir, punish me.” The King shall give him a weapon made of *udumbara*
wood, with that he shall kill himself. It is declared in the Veda that
he becomes purified by this death.’

*Viṣṇu* (52.1).—‘He who has stolen gold must bring a club to the King,
proclaiming his deed.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.257).—‘The man who has stolen gold belonging to a
Brāhmaṇa shall present to the King a club, proclaiming his deed; he
becomes purified if the King kills him with it, or pardons him.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 27).—‘For stealing more than a hundred *palas* of gold,
silver, or other precious metals, or line clothes, or very precious
gems, corporal punishment or death shall be inflicted.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 46).—‘The thief must approach the King with flying hair
running and proclaiming his deed, saying “thus have I acted, chastise
me.” By so doing, he is cleared from guilt, because he has confessed his
deed. The King therefore shall touch him with the club or dismiss him.’

*Bṛhaspati* (22.27-28).—‘For the stealing of women, men, gold, gems, the
property of a deity or Brāhmaṇa, silk and other valuable things, the
fine shall he equal to the value of the article stolen; or double the
amount shall be inflicted by the King as fine; or the thief shall be
executed, to prevent a repetition of the offence.’

*Saṃvarta* (Aparārka, p. 1079).—‘Then the King himself shall strike the
thief with a club; if the thief is alive after this, he becomes freed
from the sin of stealing.’
