+++
title = "329 अन्येषाञ् चैवम्-आदीनाम्"

+++
**(verses 8.326-331)**

*Viṣṇu* (5.83-86).—‘A stealer of thread, cotton, cow-dung, sugar, sour
milk, milk, butter-milk, grass, salt, clay, ashes, birds, fish,
clarified butter, oil, meat, honey, basket-work, split bamboo,
earthenware, or iron pots, shall pay three times its value as fine;—the
same fine is ordained for dressed food. For stealing flowers, green
grain, shrubs, creepers, climbing plants or leaves, the fine is 5
*kṛṣṇalas*;—the same for stealing pot herbs, roots or fruits.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 22-24).—‘For stealing wood, cane, grass and the like,
earthenware-utensils, bamboo, utensils made of bamboos, rattan, bone,
leather, vegetables, green roots, grass, flowers, cow-milk, molasses,
salt, oil, cooked food, dressed food spirituous liquor, flesh, and other
objects of small value, a fine five times the value of the article shall
be levied.’

*Bṛahspati* (22.20).—‘When a man takes grass, wood, flowers, or fruit,
without permission of the owner, he deserves to have a hand cut off.’

Do. (22.25).—‘He who destroys or takes away implements of husbandry, an
embankment or flowers, roots or fruits, shall be fined a hundred *paṇas,
or* more according to the nature of the offence.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.275).—‘For stealing articles trifling, mediocre or
large, the punishment shall he in accordance with the value of the
article stolen; and in the inflicting of punishments, the King shall
take into consideration the time, the place and also the age and
capacity of the offender.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 848).—‘If a non-Brāhmaṇa steals, either
forcibly or unintentionally, any of the following articles belonging to
a Brāhmaṇa, he shall have his hand cutoff:—sacrificial fuel, clarified
butter, fire-wood, grass, fodder, flower, incense, fruits; if any one is
actually caught in the act of stealing kuśa-grass, leather-vessels, or
the Agnihotra-implements, his limb shall be cut off; hut if he is found
out afterwards, he shall be made to ride a donkey if he is a Brāhmaṇa,
and shall have his head shaven.’

*Vyāsa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 325).—‘One who steals trifling and mediocre
articles, or flowers, roots or fruits, shall be made to pay double the
value of the article, or a fine of five *kṛṣṇalas*.’

Do. (p. 328).—‘For stealing things of small value or milk or
milk-products, the stealer should ho made to pay to the owner the value
of the thing, and to the King a fine double the said value.’

*Gautama* (Do.).—‘Five *kṛṣṇalas* for the stealing of fruits, green
grains or vegetables.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 327).—‘For the stealing of dressed wood,
stone, earthenware, vessels made of leather or cane, the fine shall be
either five times the value of the article stolen, or three
*kārṣāpaṇas*.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 100).—‘For stealing flowers, fruits, vegetables,
roots, cooked food, vessels of leather, bamboo or earthenware, or other
trifling things, the fine shall be not less than 12, or more than 24
*Paṇas*. For stealing articles made of iron, wood or ropes,—or of small
animals, clothes and such things, or large objects, the fine shall be
not less than 24, or more than 40 *Paṇas*; for stealing vessels made of
copper, *vṛtta* (?), bell-metal, glass or ivory, the fine shall be not
less than 48 or more than 90 *Paṇas*, *i.e*., the first amercement.’
