+++
title = "350 गुरुं वा"

+++
**(verses 8.350-351)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.15-18). ‘They declare that the slayer commits no crime by
slaying an assassin. They quote the following:—“An incendiary, a
poisoner, one raising a weapon to strike, a robber, one who forcibly
takes away land, abductor of another man’s wife,—these six are called
Ātatāyin, *Assassins*. One may slay an assassin who comes with the
intention of killing, even though he may be knowing the whole Veda along
with the Upaniṣads; by that act one does not incur the guilt of
Brāhmaṇa-slaughter. He who slays an assassin learned in the Veda and
belonging to a noble family, does not incur, by that act, the guilt of
murdering a learned Brāhmaṇa; as this is a case of fury recoiling on
fury.”’

*Baudhāyana* (1-18.11-13).—‘One should not fight with......
Brāhmaṇas,—excepting assassins. They quote the following—“He who slays
an assassin, who is able to expound the Veda and born in a noble family,
does not, by that act, incur the guilt of killing a learned Brāhmaṇa;
this being a case of fury recoiling on fury.”’

*Viṣṇu* (5.189-192).—‘Any man may unhesitatingly slay a man who attacks
him with the intent to murder him, whether he be his spiritual teacher,
young or old, or a Brāhmaṇa, or even a Brāhmaṇa versed in many branches
of sacred knowledge. By killing an assassin who attempts to kill,
whether in public or in private, no crime is committed by the
slayer—fury recoils on fury. Assassins are of seven kinds—such as try to
kill by the sword, or with poison, or with fire, such as raise their
hand to pronounce a curse, such as recite a deadly incantation from the
Atharva Veda, such as raise a false accusation reaching the ears of the
King, and such as have illicit intercourse with another man’s wife. The
same designation is given to other evil-doers who deprive others of
their reputation or of their wealth, or who destroy religious merit by
ruining pools and such things or property.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 1042).—‘Or an assassin advancing to strike one,
even though he be fully learned in the Veda, if one strikes him, one
does not incur the sin of Brāhmaṇa-killing. The following are to be
regarded as assassins:—one raising the sword to strike, one going to
administer fire or poison, one raising his hand to curse, one killing
with magic rites, one back-biting to the King, one wresting another
man’s wife.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘If one reviles on being reviled, or strikes on being
struck, or kills one who is advancing to kill, one does not commit any
offence.’
