+++
title = "357 उपचारक्रिया केलिः"

+++
**(verses 8.357-358)**

*Nārada* (12.65-66).—‘If one touches a woman where she should not be
touched, or allows himself to be similarly touched,—all such acts, done
with mutual consent are declared to be Adultery. Bestowing attentions on
a woman, sporting with her, touching her ornaments or clothes, sitting
with her on the same bed,—all such acts are declared to be adulterous.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 175).—‘Catching hold of each other’s hair is
Adultery.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.6-8).—‘Winking at a woman, smiling at her, sending
go-betweens to her, touching her ornaments or clothes,—is called
Adultery of the first degree. Sending perfumes, garlands, fruits, wine,
food or clothes, and conversing with her in secret, are regarded to be
adulterous acts of the second degree. Sitting on the same bed, dallying,
kissing or embracing each other,—is defined as Adultery of the highest
degree.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.254).—‘Touching of the cloth-knot, the cover over her
breast, or of her thighs or hair, conversing with her at improper times
and places, and sitting with her on the same bed—(all this is
Adultery).’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 855).—(Reproduces Manu CCCLVII.)

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 380).—‘Sending such presents as perfumes and
garlands, incense, ornaments and clothes, and tempting her with foods
and drinks,—all this they regard as Adultery of the middle degree.
Sitting close to each other on the same couch or seat, and catching hold
of each other’s hair,—this should be regarded as Adultery of the worst
degree.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 382).—‘Whatever acts a man does with
the intention of having intercourse with a woman, all such are declared
to he reprehensible, as being conducive to the fulfilment of illicit
love. If a man sends presents to the woman, or meets her at unreasonable
hours and improper places, or touches her neck or hair or clothes, ears,
nose, hands or other parts of the body,—if he sits with her and dines
with her on the same seat,—all this has been declared by the sages to be
Adultery. All such acts as sending presents of perfumes, garlands and
clothes, and sending letters to her, should be regarded as indicative of
Adultery.’
