+++
title = "371 भर्तारं लङ्घयेद्"

+++
*Gautama* (Aparārka, p. 857).—‘If one commits adultery with a woman of a
superior caste, his organ shall he cut off, and his property
confiscated.’

*Gautama* (23.14).—‘A woman who commits adultery with a man of lower
caste, the King shall cause to he devoured by dogs in a public place.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (21.1).—(See under next verse.)

*Viṣṇu* (5.18).—‘A woman who violates the duty which she owes to her
lord shall be put to death.’

*Nārada* (12.91).—‘When a married woman commits adultery, her head shall
be shaved, she shall have to he on the ground, receive bad food and bad
clothing and the removal of sweepings shall he assigned to her as her
occupation.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 400).—‘If during her husband’s absence,
a woman is detected in illicit intercourse, she shall he kept confined
till her husband’s return.’

*Yama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 398).—‘If a Brāhmaṇa woman, deluded by
pride, has recourse to a Śūdra, her the King shall have devoured by dogs
at the place of execution. If a Brāhmaṇa woman has recourse to a Vaiśya
or a Kṣatriya, her head shall be shaved and she shall be paraded on an
ass.’

*Mahābhārata* (12.165.64).—‘If a woman forsakes a superior bed and has
recourse to an inferior one, the King shall have her torn by dogs in a
crowded place.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 171).—‘If during her husband’s absence a woman has
intercourse with her husband’s relative or servant, she should await her
husband’s return; if the husband forgives them, the two parties shall be
released; if he does not forgive, the woman’s ears and nose shall be cut
off and her lover shall be put to death.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.286).—‘If both parties to an adultery belong to the
same caste, the highest fine shall he inflicted on the man; if the woman
is of an inferior caste, the man shall he fined with the middle
amercement; if she belongs to a superior caste, the man shall be put to
death and the woman’s ears and other parts shall he cut off.’

*Matsyapurāṇa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 400).—‘If during her husband’s
absence a man defiles a woman forcibly, he should he punished with
death, and there is no blame attaching to the woman.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 396).—‘If a man violates the bed of one of
inferior caste, he should be made to be devoured by dogs, and the woman
should be burnt by wood-fire.’
