+++
title = "374 शूद्रो गुप्तम्"

+++
**(verses 8.374-378)**

[(See the texts under
372.)](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc201305.html)

*Gautama* (12.2).—‘If a Śūdra has intercourse with an *Ārya* woman, his
organ shall he cut off, and all his property shall be confiscated.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.3.52).—‘Let him burn in straw-fire a Śūdra who has
intercourse with an *Ārya* woman.’

*Āpastamba* (2.27.9).—‘A Śūdra committing adultery with a woman of any
of the three higher castes shall suffer capital punishment.’

Do. (2-26.20).—‘If a man has actually committed adultery, his organ
shall be cut off, together with the testicles.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (21.1-5).—[(See under
372.)](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc201305.html)

*Yājñavalkya* (2.286, 294).—‘If one has intercourse with a woman of the
same caste as himself, he shall be punished with the highest fine; if
with a woman of a lower caste, with the middle fine; if with a woman of
a higher caste, he shall be put to death and the woman’s ears and nose
shall be cut off. If a Caṇḍāla has intercourse with an Ārya woman, he
shall be put to death.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.40-43).—‘An adulterer shall be made to pay the highest
amercement, if he has had connection with a woman of his own caste;—for
adultery with a woman of a lower caste, the middle amercement. He who
has had connection with a woman of one of the lowest castes shall be put
to death;—as also for having connection with a woman of the highest
caste.’

*Nārada* (12.78).—‘Intercourse is permitted with a wanton woman who
belongs to another than a Brāhmaṇa-caste, or a prostitute, or a female
slave, or a female not restrained by her master; if these women belong
to a lower caste than oneself; but with a woman of a superior caste
intercourse is forbidden.’

*Bṛhaspati* (23.12).—‘The highest fine shall he inflicted for connection
with a woman of equal caste; half of that, for connection with a woman
of inferior caste; but a man who has connection with a woman of superior
caste shall be put to death.’

*Yama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 395).—‘If a Śūdra has connection with a
Brāhmaṇa woman, the King shall put him to death on a heated iron-bed,
burning the sinful man there with wood, leaves and grass.’
