+++
title = "379 मौण्ड्यम् प्राणान्तिकम्"

+++
**(verses 8.379-381)  
**

*Gautama* (8.13).—‘The Brāhmaṇa who is well-versed in his *dharma* must
not be subjected to corporal punishment; he must not be imprisoned; he
must not be fined; he must not be exiled; he must not be reviled; he
must not be excluded.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.18.17).—‘A Brāhmaṇa, forsooth, shall not suffer corporal
punishment for any offence.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.2-3).—‘In the case of a Brāhmaṇa, no corporal punishment must
be inflicted; a Brāhmaṇa must be banished from the country, his body
having been branded.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 41, 42).—‘On no account shall the King kill a Brāhmaṇa,
though convicted of all possible crimes. He may be banished. The King
shall confiscate his entire wealth or leave him a fourth part for
himself.’

*Bṛhaspati* (27.11, 12).—‘A Brāhmaṇa, though a mortal sinner, shall not
suffer capital punishment; the King shall banish him and cause him to be
branded and shaved; the Brāhmaṇa who deserves capital punishment shall
be compelled to pay one hundred *Suvarṇas*; one deserving to have a limb
cut off, half as much; and one deserving to have the thumb and index
finger cut off, half of that.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 634).—‘Even if he has committed
heinous crimes, the Brāhmaṇa may be banished, branded, or made to
undergo expiations; for the Brāhmaṇa should not be made to suffer bodily
pain.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 631).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, there is no cutting off of
limbs; the Brāhmaṇa is always purified by penances and austerities.’

*Yama* (Do., p. 636).—‘For crimes committed by the Brāhmaṇa, the
following punishments have been ordained: shaving of the head,
banishment from the city, proclamation of his sin, parading on an ass,
branding on the forehead.’
