+++
title = "398 शुल्कस्थानेषु कुशलाः"

+++
*Yājñavalkya* (2.261).—‘The King shall take as duty the twentieth part
of the price fixed for each commodity.’

*Gautama* (10.26).—‘In the case of merchandise one-twentieth should be
paid as duty.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.18.14-15).—‘The duty on goods imported by sea is, after
deducting a choice article, ten *Paṇas* in the hundred. He shall also
lay just duties on other marketable goods, according to their intrinsic
value, without oppressing the traders.’

*Arthaśāstra* (I, p. 241).—‘The trade-commissioner shall keep himself
informed of the prices and the demand for commodities got out of the
earth and those got out of the water, imported by land and by
water;—also of the time for their collection and disposal. Of such
commodities as are found in large quantities, he shall fix the price
after collecting them in one place. Of commodities produced in his own
country, the commissioner shall establish an emporium with a single
outlet; of those imported from outside, there shall be an emporium with
several outlets; and the sale of those kinds of commodities shall he so
arranged as to be most helpful to the people of the country. Even large
profits he shall forego if it injures the people...... In the case of
commodities sold by measures of capacity, 16 per cent, shall be the duty
payable to the King; 20 per cent, in the case of things sold by weight;
11 per cent, in that of things sold by the number. Exports from outside
he shall encourage by favourable treatment. To sea-going and land
merchants he shall grant concessions and advances and help in other
ways.’

*Viṣṇu* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 304),—‘In the case of commodities produced
in the country itself, the King shall levy a duty in the shape of the
tenth part; and in that of those imported from outside, the twentieth
part.’
