+++
title = "410 वाणिज्यङ् कारयेद्"

+++
**(verses 8.410-418)  
**

*Nārada* (18.4-6).—‘Sinful confusion of castes, the rules regarding
their means of subsistence and other subjects have been dealt with in
the Miscellaneous Chapter. The King shall he careful to protect all
orders and the constituent elements of his state with the four means
indicated by science. When any caste remains behind the rest, or exceeds
the limits assigned to it, the King, seeing that it has strayed from its
path, shall bring it back to the path of duty.’

*Gautama* (8.1-3).—‘A king and a deeply read Brāhmaṇa are the upholders
of moral order in the world; on them

depends the existence of the fourfold human race, of conscious beings,
of those that move on feet and on wings, and of those which creep—as
well as the protection of the offspring, the prevention of the confusion
of castes and the sacred law.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.39-41).—‘The three lower castes shall live under the
guidance of the Brāhmaṇa;—he shall declare their duties;—and the King
shall govern them accordingly.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 626).—‘The King is the ruler of men, in
regard to favours and punishments; he keeps in check people prone to
transgress the bounds of propriety and to misappropriate the property
and wives of others.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., 152).—‘The three lower castes may take to slavery, but
never the Brāhmaṇa. Among the various castes, the lower can be a slave
to the higher, but never the higher to the lower. Among, Kṣatriyas,
Vaiśyas and Śūdras there may be slavery among members of the same caste,
but a Brāhmaṇa should never be made to work as a slave. If a Brāhmaṇa is
made to work as a slave, the King’s glory fades away.’

*Nārada* (Do., pp. 144-145).—‘These first four kinds of slaves are never
freed from slavery, except through the masters’ favour. Of slaves, there
are fifteen varieties—(1) one born in the masters’ house, (2) bought,
(3) obtained as present, (4) inherited, (5) saved from starvation during
a famine, (6) one kept in pledge, (7) acquired by freeing him from debt,
(8) won in battle, (9) won by betting, (10) one who has surrendered
himself, (11) one fallen from renunciation, (12) one who has become a
slave for a limited period, (13) slave for fooding, (14) one who has
accepted slavery through his love for a slave-girl, and (15) one who has
sold himself.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 80).—‘If one puts up for sale a Śūdra who is a minor
or who is the very life of an Ārya, one shall be fined 12 Paṇas; one who
puts up a Vaiśya, 24 Paṇas; a Kṣatriya, 36 Paṇas; a Brāhmaṇa, 48 Paṇas.
This applies to cases where the boy is put up by his own relatives. If
it is done by strangers, the penalty shall be the three kinds of
*Death*; also for the buyers and those who witness the transaction. For
the Mlecchas there is no offence, if they sell or pledge their
offspring; but an Ārya can never be a slave.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.579).—‘The wife, the son and the slave,—these three
have no property; whatever they earn is the property of those to whom
they belong.’
