+++
title = "002 न वै"

+++
**(verses 11.1-2)**

The two verses together form one sentence; which lays down the several
characteristics of the person seeking for gifts; the sense being that
gifts shall be given, in proportion to their learning, to such penniless
men as, having the said character of ‘seeking for progeny’ and the rest,
may be seeking for gifts.

The term ‘*religious mendicant*,’ while qualifying the recipient of
gifts, serves also as a condition that entitles the man to receive
gifts. Thus it is that by laying down the character of the man fit for
receiving gifts, the Author also indicates the occasions on which gifts
may be given.

‘*One seeking for progeny*,’—h e who intends to marry for the purpose of
obtaining children. It is for the marriage that money is required; and
it helps in the obtaining of children indirectly. Inasmuch as the text
has added the epithet ‘religious,’ one need not give gifts to one who is
going to marry a second time, only through lust.

Similarly, ‘*one who is going to perform, a sacrifice*’ is to be
understood as referring to one who is seeking for wealth in order to
enable him to perform the *Agnihotra* and other compulsory rites.

The ‘*traveller on the road*,’—the person whose supply has run short
during his journey.

‘*Who has given away all his belongings*’;—*i.e*., the man who has given
away his entire property, as the sacrificial fee for the Viśvajit
sacrifice,—and not by way of an expiatory rite.

‘*He who is begging for study*’;—though for the *Religious Student*, all
that is laid down is ‘Vedic Study’ and ‘living on alms,’—yet enough
should be given to him to provide for his clothing. Or, even one who has
learnt the Veda may be seeking for the knowledge of what is contained in
the Veda, though he may be living on alms.

‘*Sick man*’—one suffering from a disease.

The name ‘*Snātaka*’ has been mentioned here only with a view to
eulogising the men spoken of. And the reason for applying this name lies
in the fact that as a rule ‘begging for the preceptor’ and ‘begging for
study’ are possible only for the *Snātaka*, the Accomplished Student;
though for the Religious Student also it has been laid down that he
shall do the begging for his preceptor.

‘*Penniless*’—destitute of wealth.

‘*In proportion to their learning*;’—*i.e*., much wealth shall be given
to one possessed of much learning, and little to one possessed of little
learning.

“All this that is stated here appears to be wholly irrelevant; as what
the Author has declared is—‘I am now going to expound the law relating
to Expiations’ (10.131).”

There is no force in this objection. In fact the whole context deals
with the duties of men in the various stages of life. The several
Expiatory Bites are of unequal nature, and hence these are mentioned
along with those. And what is stated in the opening verse has been
mentioned first, because it also indicates certain occasions for the
performance of expiatory rites.

It bus been said that ‘gifts shall be given’; and the act of ‘giving’
can be accomplished only through something that may be given; hence the
Author proceeds, in the next verso, to point, out what it is that should
be given.—(1-2)


