+++
title = "006 धनानि तु"

+++
If a man has enough wealth to enable him to maintain his dependants for
three years,—or if he possesses more—he is worthy of drinking
Soma-juice.

Inasmuch as the performance of the Soma-sacrifice has been prescribed by
the *Śruti* as a compulsory act to be done daily, the present verse
cannot be accepted as applicable to even that case where the man’s
dependants are in want; since Śruti is the highest authority in these
matters. The present prohibition should therefore be taken as meant to
apply to such Soma-sacrifices as may be purely voluntary.

“In connection with the Soma-sacrifice, much wealth is needed for the
purchase of the Soma and the hiring of the services of the priests, for
whom ‘twelve thousand’ has been prescribed as the sacrificial fee. Thus
then, since much larger wealth would be necessary for the performance,
how is it that the text speaks of what is just enough for the
maintenance of the man’s dependants *for three years*?”

As a matter of fact, when a man possesses much wealth, he does fulfil
the condition of possessing enough to maintain his dependants for three
years; so that it would be open to the man possessed of much wealth to
perform the sacrifice.

Though as a rule the term ‘*dāna*,’ ‘*gift*,’ is used in the sense of
*gift of food*, yet people might be led to make gifts of gold also, for
the purpose of enabling the recipient to purchase the Soma and perform
the Soma-sacrifice. And it is such gifts that the next verse is intended
to forbid. \[The penniless man shall not perform the voluntary
Soma-sacrifices\].—(6)


