+++
title = "012 यो वैश्यः"

+++
**(verses 11.11-12)**

Inasmuch as the text speaks of the *requisite*, it follows that the
appropriation here permitted applies, not only to the gold necessary for
the making up of the sacrificial fee, but also to animals and other
things necessary for the sacrifice. All that the text lays down is the
*appropriation* of the thing, and not the mode by which it should be
done. Hence the thing may he acquired either by begging, or by exchange
or by stealing.

“But it has been said that ownership is not acquired by stealing.”

There is no force in this objection. Since it is directly laid down
here, in so many words, that the thing shall be ‘*appropriated*’; and it
has also been said that ‘a sacrifice may be accomplished even by doing a
mean act.’

There is nothing to show whether this ‘appropriation’ is permitted only
in a case where a sacrifice having been begun, all its requisites are at
hand, with the exception of a single article,—or also when it is
intended to be taken in hand.

‘*Specially of a Brāhmaṇa*’—This shows that for the Kṣatriya and the
Vaiśya also the said appropriation under the said circumstance is
permitted.

“What Kṣatriya is there who would *beg?* Specially as begging is
absolutely impossible for the Kṣatriya.”

What you say is not enough. For the Brāhmaṇa also, *stealing* is
forbidden. The fact of the matter is that there is no restriction
regarding the method to be employed in the appropriation under the said
circumstances.

^(‘)*During the reign of a righteous king*’— This is purely reiterative.
If the king is righteous and knows the law, he would know that under
tin; peculiar circumstances *stealing* is permitted, and hence the
sacrificer would he emboldened to do the appropriation. If, on the other
hand, the king did not know the law, he would punish the said
appropriation like ordinary *theft*; and hence under his rule no one
would think of doing it.

‘*Possessing many cattle*’—This stands for all kinds of wealth.

‘*Who does not perform sacrifices*’—*i.e*., who does not do any
righteous act, in the shape of giving gifts and so forth.

‘*Kuṭumba*’ stands here for the *house*. It is stealing from the house
that is exceptionally objectionable; hence it is this that is permitted.
But no such restriction is meant as that it should be taken ‘*from* *the
house*’ only; it may be taken also from the threshing yard and such
other places, where the particular thing may be available; specially as
it is going to be declared later on (Verse 17)—‘either from the
threshing yard, or from the field, or from the house.’—(11-12)


