+++
title = "026 देवस्वम् ब्राह्मणस्वम्"

+++
‘*Property o* *f* *the gods*’ is the name given to all that belongs to
such men of the three higher castes as are disposed to perform
sacrifices. ‘*Property of the Brāhmaṇa*’ is the name that is applied to
the belongings of even such Brāhmaṇas as are not disposed to perform
sacrifices.

It is in this sense that the verse may be construed:

As a matter of fact however Verse 20 above, which says—The property of
those disposed to perform sacrifices the wise call the ‘*property of the
gods, etc*.’—is purely declamatory, and not meant to provide the
definition of technical terms; like such terms as ‘theft’ and the like.
For this reason we proceed to explain it differently.

That wealth which has been set apart as to be spent for the gods, in the
performance of sacrifices and other such acts, is ‘*the property of the
gods*’; as direct *ownership* is not possible for the gods. In fact the
gods never make use of any property, by their own wish; nor are they
found to be actually taking care of any property; and it is where all
this is found that property is said in ordinary life to *belong* to a
person. Hence the name ‘*property of the gods*’ must apply to that which
has been set apart as to be used on behalf of the gods,—with such
formula as ‘this is no longer mine, it is the god’s.’ And this can refer
to only what has been enjoined as to be offered to Agni and other
deities at the *Darśa-pūrṇamāsa* and other sacrifices; and it is merely
on the basis of the custom of cultured people that it can be applied,
only figuratively, to what is offered at sacrifices to Durgā and other
deities (which latter are not enjoined in the Veda).

“In the ordinary world, it is property dedicated to the four-armed and
other images in temples that is called ‘the property of the gods;’ and
it is only right that in the interpretation of scriptures we should
accept that meaning of a word in which it is used in ordinary parlance.”

This would be so, if the term ‘*devasvam*,’ ‘property of the gods,’ were
recognised as a non-composite, word (whose denotation is not affected by
that of its component parts). As a matter of fact, however, the term
‘*devasvam*’ is composite, and its best denotation therefore is that
which is provided by its component parts (‘*deva*,’ ‘gods,’ and
‘*svam*,’ ‘property’); and there is no authority for the assuming of any
other denotation. That the true deific character does not belong to the
four-armed image is shown by the simple fact that it is regarded as an
‘*image*’ (and not as the *reality*)’, nor is there any definition of
‘god’ which can apply directly to the image. According to usage, the
property of such images may be called ‘property of the gods.’ But even
there, there can be no *ownership*. And yet actual business may be
carried on in accordance with the explanation given above. All this has
been explained in Discourse II (Verse 189).—(26)


