+++
title = "036 न वै"

+++
In connection with the appointing of the priests at the *Agnihotra* it
has been said,—‘one shall pour the libations or have it poured;’ and as
these words are applicable equally to the man and the woman, as being
entitled to the pouring of milk-offerings, the present text forbids it
in regard to girls and youthful women.

Similarly the possibility of such offerings being made by one who is
possessed of ‘*little learning*’—*i.e*., knows only the texts bearing on
the two oblations,—or by ‘*a fool*.’

‘*Distressed*’—by illness.

‘*Without sacraments*’—who has not been initiated.

Some people hold that this explanation of the text is not right. As
regards the *Śrauta* Agnihotra, the declaration is—‘on each *Parva day*
one shall pour the libations himself, or one of the priests shall do
it;’ there is no possibility for a woman ever acting as a ‘priest’;
hence the prohibition herein contained must pertain to ‘the girl and the
youthful woman,’—its purpose being to indicate the possibility of its
being done by a woman who has got a son. In support of this they quote
the following words of other Sūtra-writers—‘The wife may freely pour the
morning and evening libations in the domestic fire.’ Others again, on
the strength of what is said (in the next verse) regarding one being
‘skilled in the rituals,’ hold that the prohibition pertains to the
Three Fires (of the Śrauta ritual).

But as a matter of fact the term ‘*vitāna*’ (used in the next verse)
stands for ‘ritual’; and all this is performed only in *Śrauta* fires;
so that there is no possibility of either *women* or *unlearned* men.
performing these; specially as it has been laid down that only very
specially qualified persons should act as priests.

From all this it is clear that the term ‘*Agnihotra*’ here stands for
all kinds of rites, and the term ‘*hotṛ*’ for all classes of priests. So
that the present *Smṛti* is only a reiteration of what has been enjoined
in the Veda.—(36)


