+++
title = "044 अकुर्वन् विहितम्"

+++
The text now proceeds to describe those Expiatory Rites which form the
subject-matter of the discourse, and first of all it describes the
persons liable to the performance of these rites. What is it that makes
a man liable?

‘*What is enjoined*’—as a compulsory act, such as the Twilight Prayers,
the Agnihotra and so forth, all such as have their compulsory character
indicated by such words as ‘one shall perform the Agnihotra *throughout
life*.’ Those acts also that have been laid down as to be done under
specified circumstances,—such as bathing when one is defiled by the
touch of something unclean—are included among those ‘*enjoined*.’

‘*Does* *not do*’—through carelessness or laziness.

Similarly ‘*what is censured*’—forbidden, such as the drinking of wine
and so forth. If one, transgressing the Scriptures, has recourse to such
acts.

‘*Becomes liable to expiatory rites*.’—All this means that the liability
in this case is conditional; the performance of expiatory rites being
incumbent upon one who omits what is enjoined and does what is
forbidden.

“For one who is desirous of acquiring a village the *Sāṅgra* *haṇī*
sacrifice has been *enjoined*; so that if one who is desirous of
acquiring a village is somehow unable to perform that sacrifice, this
would be an *omission of what is enjoined* on his part; as soon as he
conceives a desire for the acquisition of a village, the said sacrifice
becomes for him an ‘enjoined act’; so that if he does not undertake it,
he transgresses the injunction and hence should be liable to the
expiatory rites.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—What the injunction in such a
case means is that ‘when one undertakes the performance of the
particular sacrifice, he is led to it by a desire for the reward in the
shape of a village’; so that what the scriptural injunction really does
is to indicate the relation of cause and effect between the ‘sacrifice’
and the ‘acquisition of a village.’ Even though in this case also the
main idea expressed by the injunctive sentence is that the act in
question *should be done*, yet what the injunction actually does is to
lay down that the act should be done only for the accomplishment of the
said purpose. So that all that happens to the person omitting the
performance of that sacrifice is that that purpose is not accomplished;
such omission does not involve a sin; and an expiatory rite would be
necessary only when there has been some sin.

“Whence is the idea derived that the omission of a compulsory duty
involves sin? In connection with the Agnihotra and such other compulsory
acts, we do not find any such assertion as—‘he who does not do it incurs
sin.’”

As a matter of fact we do find sentences occurring in the wake of the
injunction of compulsory duties,—such as ‘*vedibh-yaḥ paramā bhavati*’
\[which are understood to be indicative of the said idea\]; and in
almost all cases there are declamatory passages indicative of the sin
involved in the omission of compulsory acts; and there must be some
truth in these; otherwise they could not be construed along with any
injunction. Even in cases where no such declamatory passages are
actually found, they are always assumed in support of injunctions. In
fact it is the declamatory passages that constitute the driving force
behind injunctions; such driving force would not be efficient unless it
were assumed that an omission would involve sin. In the actual practice
of all experienced men such is the operation of all Injunctions.
Injunction is as a rule known to *urge* people to actions;—men are never
*urged* to anything except what serves a useful purpose for them; and it
is with a view to guard against the contingency of the Injunction
becoming deprived of this *urging* force that we have to make the said
assumption (of passages declaring that omission involves sin). Though
the urging power could be secured also by assuming that the act
concerned leads to Heaven, yet, as such an idea would be inconsistent
with the conception that the act should be done *throughout life*, it
becomes necessary to conclude that the due performance saves one from
*sin*. To this end we have the assertion—‘even a hundred injunctions do
not secure that activity of men which is brought about by fear.’

From all this it is clear that when the text speaks of a man not doing
‘*what is enjoined*,’ it refers to the *compulsory acts*.

“In connection with bathing on touching an unclean thing, there are no
words indicating its compulsory character, like such expressions as
‘throughout life’ and the like.”

What is the need of any other words? What the text is understood to
indicate is that a certain act is to be done under certain specified
circumstances; and there is no need for any other driving agency. The
fact of the act being compulsory is expressed by the notion that
whenever the said circumstance presents itself, it should be done. In
the case of *Agnihotra* and such other rites also, we do not find the
texts actually containing the term ‘compulsory,’—the compulsory
character bring indicated only by the absolute certainty of the
condition mentioned (‘throughout life,’ in connection with the
Agnihotra).

‘*Addicted*’—Constantly using such sensual objects as richly cooked
food, sandal-paint and unguents, etc. This implies the character of
bring always given to such enjoyment.

“This has been already prohibited under 4.16, where it has been said
that—‘one shall not attach himself to sensual pleasures.’”

People think that since this latter passage occurs in connection with
the vows of the Accomplished Student, it cannot serve as a general
Prohibition. What occurs under ‘vows’ cannot be regarded as a
Prohibition; as what is enjoined under ‘vows’ is the taking of a certain
resolve, in some such form as—‘I shall not do such and such an act.’

Or, some one may be inclined to think that the former prohibition being
a slight one, the offence is not a serious one. With a view to guard
against this, the Author has put the offence on the same footing as
other serious offences.

Or, the explanation may be that it is often found that, even though
something has been forbidden in a general way, it is again forbidden
specifically, for the purpose of indicating its importance.

For instance, we often meet with such assertions as—‘The Brāhmaṇas have
come,—the *Vaśiṣṭhas* have also come.’

‘*Becomes liable to expiatory rites*’— The term ‘*prāyaścitta*,’
‘*expiatory rite*,’ is a conventional name applied to certain rites
performed under certain specified conditions, and the form
‘*prāyaścittīyate*’ is formed according to Pāṇini 3.1.85.

‘*Man*’— This term has been added for the purpose of indicating that
what is here stated applies to all the four castes.—(44)


