+++
title = "046 अकामतः कृतम्"

+++
*Question*.—“Do these Expiatory Rites end only with their performance
(without bringing about any effects), just like the Twilight Prayers and
other rites? Or, do they continue until definite effects are produced,
in the form of the actual removal of the guilt like the act of cleansing
the body (which ends only with the actual removal of the dirt)?”

In answer to this some people offer the following explanation:—As a
matter of fact no action is ever lost; both merit and demerit (due to
actions) end only with the bringing about of their effects; no actions
ever disappear until they have brought about their effects. This is what
is meant by the assertion that ‘no action is ever lost’ Hence the man
who commits a transgression *must* experience the tortures of hell, as
the result of that transgression, \[so that no expiation of any
transgression is possible\]; and the only effect of his not performing
the prescribed expiatory rite would be that he shall also transgress the
law laying down such rite, and thus commit a further offence.

This, however, is not right Because, simply because the texts lay down
that the rite shall be performed, such rite does not become *compulsory*
\[and it is only the omission of a compulsory act that involves sin\].
All that is said is that the man becomes ‘cleansed’; from which it is
clear that this *cleansing* is the purpose served by the expiatory rite.
So that when expiatory rites are performed, one would wash off his sins;
and this would he done because of the sin having been committed by the
man himself.

It has been argued above that—“all that has been indicated is that sin
is incurred by the man who commits an act that has been forbidden by a
prohibitive text; and not that the sin becomes nullified by means of
expiations.”

But this also is not right. Because what has been indicated is that the
said act becomes a source of suffering; now in Expiation also there is
much suffering in the form of penances and charities; and it is quite
possible that the small amount of suffering undergone in the shape of
these latter should prevent the onset of the greater sufferings
threatening in the future. Just as a serious disease is prevented by the
eating of bitter medicines and keeping on low diet; or again, when a man
having committed an offence surrenders himself to the king and confesses
his guilt, saying—‘I have done such and such an act,’—the punishment
inflicted upon such a man is only half of what is prescribed for that
offence; while if he were arrested by the king’s officers and brought to
court, his punishment would be much severer.

Thus it is that the utility of the injunctions in question (of
expiations) becomes established. That the rites are destructive of the
effects of sins has to be admitted on the strength of the injunctions
themselves. It is for this reason that these rites have been called
‘expiatory’ of sins; for the sin is said to be ‘expiated’ only when it
has become deprived of its causal efficiency.

For the same reason the Expiatory Rite cannot be regarded as restoring
the rights and privileges lost by. reason of the guilt; since it is only
in the case of the five most heinous offences that any loss of
privileges has been mentioned,—the very term ‘becoming an outcast’
meaning *the loss of the privileges of the caste*.

In connection with the present context it should not be understood that
any such marked distinction is intended as that ‘in the case of
*unintentional* offences the expiation consists in the reciting of the
Veda, and in that of *intentional* offences of penances’;—because as a
matter of fact both kinds of expiation have been laid down in connection
with both kinds of offences; specially as every rule regarding an
expiatory rite starts off with the defining of the occasion for
expiation; *e.g.,* ‘The Slayer of a Brāhmaṇa shall make a cut, etc,
etc.’ (11.72)

Thus then, all that the verse means is that—‘there is heavy expiation in
the case of intentional offences, and a lighter one in that of
unintentional ones.’

“In fact when a man commits an act unintentionally, he is not the *doer*
of that act; as one is called the ‘doer’of an act only when he does it
intentionally; as we find people making such assertions as—‘This man is
not doing such and such an act, he is being made by fate to do it’
Further, it is only as done with a distinct motive towards it that an
act forms the subject of a prohibition; *e.g*., it is only when a man
evinces a desire for drinking wine that he is told ‘not to drink the
wine’; and if a man eager for a drink of water drinks wine thinking it
to be water, he does not incur any guilt; and this for the simple reason
that his action has not been prompted by the motive to drink wine. It
might be argued that it is only an action that has formed the subject of
an Injunction that cannot be forbidden. This is quite true, so far as
actions without a purpose are concerned; but of actions with a purpose,
a prohibition is always possible.”

In answer to this some people offer the following explanation:—What
forms the subject-matter of prohibitive texts is the affirmation of an
act as extending up to the sin that its commitment involves; just as it
does in the case of taking poison.

For these people the objection has no force at all. As regards the
taking of ‘poison,’ there can be no distinction as to its being done
intentionally or unintentionally; in either case the act must lead to
death.

Similarly in the case of such acts as ‘the Slaying of a Brāhmaṇa’ and
the like.

According to some people an act is done because of the declaration that
*it shall be done*, and it is not done because of the declaration that
*it shall not be done*. And by this view also prohibitions apply to only
one who is going to do some ordinary act; it is only when a man is going
to do an act that he is called its ‘doer.’ But a man can be a ‘doer’
even without knowing it, as when he falls down a river-bank. It cannot
be said that in such a case the man is called a ‘doer’ only in the
figurative sense; because the *doer* (nominative) has been defined only
as ‘one who is his own master regarding the act,’ and not as ‘one who
does an act *intentionally*

Further, from the present text itself it is clear that even acts due to
sheer negligence have been held to involve sin, and hence necessitate
expiation. What is the need of any further assumptions?—(46)


