+++
title = "047 प्रायश्चित्तीयताम् प्राप्य"

+++
‘*By chance*’—through his own negligence.

Some people read ‘*mohāt*’ in place of ‘*daivāt*.’ It is only *through
folly* (‘*mohāt*’) that people commit misdeeds; which man, who is not *a
fool*, shall ever transgress a scriptural injunction?

‘*By a previous misdeed*’—Some evil deeds committed in previous life,
whose effects have been already experienced, and which are inferred from
such physical defects as disfigured nails and the like.

The meaning of all this is as follows:—Transgressions done in the
present life are either intentional or unintentional; and the same
should be inferred also in the case of acts done in previous lives.

“But what is the expiation to be done in the case of disfigured nails
and such physical defects?”

The ‘*Kṛcchra*,’ the ‘*Atikṛcchra*’ and the ‘*Cāndrāyaṇa*’ are expiatory
rites applicable to all cases; though Vaśiṣṭha has declared that ‘the
man should perform that special expiatory rite somehow connected with
that which is indicative of the previous sin.’

What the present text thus means is that those who have not performed
the Expiatory Rite to which they are liable shall avoid associating with
righteous men; *i.e*., they should not mix with them in study and such
acta

Though the act of ‘associating’ pertains to both parties, and hence when
prohibited in reference to one, it becomes forbidden for both,—yet the
prohibition is again repeated (in 189) in the form that ‘righteous men
shall not associate with them,’ and this is on account of the agents
concerned in the two cases being different. If there were prohibition in
reference to one party only, then a transgressing of this prohibition
would render that, party alone liable to expiation,—and not the other
party, even though the latter also would have done the act of
‘associating.’ Hence with a view to indicate the liability of both
parties we have the two distinct prohibitions—one for the righteous and
another for the unrighteous. The upshot of all this is that no one
should associate with persons with black teeth and so forth, until they
have performed the necessary expiatory rite.—(47)


