+++
title = "058 रेतःसेकः स्वयोनीषु"

+++
‘*Uterine sisters*’—sisters horn of the same mother as oneself.

‘*Virgins*’— unmarried women.

‘*Low-born women*’—wild women.

‘*Friend*’—companion; his ‘*women*.’

The use of the generic term ‘women’ indicates that it is not only the
*wife* that is meant What is meant is a woman *kept* for carnal
purposes, by the friend or the son.

What we hold however is that, even though the text has used the generic
term^(‘)women,’ yet it cannot be regarded as putting the *married* and
the *unmarried* women on the same footing; because such an equalisation
would be highly unreasonable.

What is said here is not for the purpose of indicating what the exact
expiatory rite in the case should be, but with a view to indicate \[the
seriousness of the crime; which, of course, means that\] the expiation
also should be heavy. This is what has been set forth in the
declaration—‘these shall be heavy in the case of serious, and light in
that of lighter, crimes.’ If all this were for this purpose of
indicating the exact expiatory rite, it should have occurred under the
section dealing with these rites proper. Further, since^(‘)bearing false
witness,’ and^(‘)slaying of a friend,’ are here placed on the same
footing as^(‘)wine-drinking,’ the expiation for these could not be
prescribed as the same as that in the case
of^(‘)Brāhmaṇa-killing’;—secondly, the^(‘)falsely harassing the
Preceptor’ has here been declared to be equal to^(‘)Brāhmaṇa-killing,’
and yet later on it has been considered necessary to lay down again for
this offence the same expiation as for^(‘)Brāhmaṇa-killing’;—thirdly,
carnal intercourse with a^(‘)virgin’ has here been said to be equal to
the^(‘)violating of the Preceptor’s bed,’ and yet it was considered
necessary to prescribe again for this offence the same expiation as that
for the said^(‘)violating of the Preceptor’s bed.’ From all this it is
clear that the present equalising of the various sins here with one or
the other of the heinous offences is not meant to be an injunction of
the necessary expiatory rites.

Other people think that even though all that is meant is to indicate the
seriousness of the crimes, yet there is nothing unreasonable in the
equalisation here set forth; which may, therefore, be taken as meant to
indicate the exact expiations. As for the fact that, even
though^(‘)bearing false witness,’ and ‘slaying a friend’ are here put on
the same footing as^(‘)winedrinking.’ yet the exact expiation for it has
been prescribed to be the same as that for Brāhmaṇa-killing,—this means
simply that the two expiations are meant to be optional. Where there is
absolute equalisation, there can be no option; as is clear from Verse 87
below.—(58)


