+++
title = "059 गोवधो ऽयाज्य-संयाज्यम्"

+++
The author now proceeds to describe the ‘*Minor offences*.’

‘*Those unworthy to sacrifice*,’—*i.e*., the outcast, the Śūdra and so
forth,—‘sacrificing’ f or these. The use of the affix ‘*ṇya*’ in the
nominal sense is a Vedic anomaly.

‘*Selling oneself*’— Making oneself a slave, subservient to another man,
and thus putting himself on the same footing as the cow and such other
properties as are sold.

Others read—‘*pāradāryamavikrayam*’—‘adultery and selling what should
not be sold.’

What is meant by ‘*selling oneself*’ is taking service under an
unrighteous master, when there is only slight trouble, in the shape of
want of livelihood and the like.

The ‘*abandoning of the teacher*’—means the neglect of attention due to
him; *e.g*., having recourse to another teacher, while the former
teacher is quite competent to teach.

Similarly with the ‘*abandoning of* one’s *father and mother*.’

What is reprehensible is the abandoning of these when they are not
outcasts. If they have become outcasts, their abandoning would be only
right and proper.

The Construction is—‘*the abandoning of Vedic study and the Fire*’ The
‘*abandoning of Vedic study*’ means not carrying out in practice the
injunction that ‘one should recite the Veda everyday.’

“Would the omission of this study for a single day, or for one year,
Constitute this offence?”

Since the text contains no qualification, it would seem that omission
for even one day would constitute the offence.

This, however, is not right. Because the injunction of daily study is a
compulsory one; and a distinct expiation is going to be set forth later
on for the omission of a compulsory duty. Hence what is meant here is
such neglect as leads to the Veda being entirely forgotten.

This neglect having been declared (under 56) to be equal to
‘wine-drinking,’ the present text is meant to indicate an alternative
expiation; the exact alternative to be employed should be determined by
the comparative seriousness or otherwise of the neglect in any
particular case. For instance, if the neglect of Vedic study is due to
the man being engaged on another Vedic rite, his offence would be a
*minor* one; while if it is due to the man giving himself up to luxury,
or to moneymaking, or to quarrels,—his offence would be equal to
‘wine-drinking.’

As the ‘fire’ is spoken of in the singular, it should be understood to
mean the *domestic fire*;—the *Śrauta* Fires having been all along
spoken of in the plural.

“In connection with the offences of abandoning *the Śrauta* Fires, the
*Cāndrāyaṇa* penance has been declared to be the expiatory rite. In the
present context also, since the act would be of the nature of a *minor*
offence, the expiation would consist of the same penance.”

There is no force in this objection; since in connection with *minor
offences* also, diverse expiatory rites have been laid down;—the
comparative seriousness or otherwise of the offence and the heaviness or
lightness of the expiation being determined in each case by
considerations of the capacity of the man concerned. And when the
*Cāndrāyaṇa* penance has been *mentioned* as *the* expiation for *minor
offences*, what is meant is that that penance represents the lowest
limit ‘*Abandoning of the son*’— means omitting to support him, or
turning him out of the house—when he is no longer an infant and is duly
qualified. In the abandoning of a son who has become an outcast, there
would be no wrong.—(59)


