+++
title = "061 कन्याया दूषणम्"

+++
‘*Defiling a maiden*’;—*i.e*., having recourse to her in the spirit of
bravado that ‘she has not yet been touched by man’; or, the depriving
her of her chastity by touching her generative organ with the toe or
such other parts of the body;—in fact doing all these, with the sole
exception of actual sexual intercourse;—which latter has been declared
to be equal to ‘the violating of the Preceptor’s bed.’

‘*Usury*’— Making money by this means as a means of living,—even in
normal times. Vaśiṣṭha has declared that ‘usury consists in lending
money or grains on interest.’ This is a scriptural technicality, not
subject to the notions of the ordinary world.

‘*Breaking of a vow*.’—A ‘vow’ consists in the taking of such resolution
as—‘I shall rather starve than partake of food in the house of such and
such a person eating at whose place is forbidden’; and if one does not
keep to this resolve, it would be ‘breaking of the vow.’

“As a matter of fact, the name ‘vow,’ *vrata*, is given to a restriction
that one voluntarily puts upon himself; and if the resolve is a
voluntary one, how could deviation from that constitute a transgression
of the scriptures? it has been said that ‘by omitting to do what is
enjoined one becomes liable to expiation’; and the resolution in the
case in question is not ‘what is enjoined.”’

The answer to this is as follows:—It is true that in the initial stage
the vow is purely voluntary; but the *keeping* of it is what has been
‘enjoined’ by the scriptures. Just as in the case of the Saurya and
other sacrifices performed with a view to definite rewards,—the act, in
its initial stage, is purely voluntary; but the continuation and
completion of it (when once begun) is what is ‘enjoined’; the act could
be discontinued only either if the performer had ceased to desire the
particular reward, or if the reward were actually obtained; in all such
cases the performer would be blamed as being energetic only in
undertaking an act.

As regards the observances to be kept by the Accomplished Student, the
text is going to lay down a very light expiation for the neglect of
these. And this may be regarded as an optional alternative to what is
here laid down.

‘*Garden*’— flower-gardens and parks, etc.

Another *Smṛti* declares all kinds of land as ‘not to be sold.’—(61)


