+++
title = "065 अनाहिताग्निता स्तेयम्"

+++
‘*Omission of Fire-laying*’—is an offence in the case of a man who has
been married and has got a son, and is possessed of the requisite means.
The author of the *Smṛti* thinks that since the Vedic texts laying down
Fire-laying do not contain any conditions, they clearly indicate the
compulsory character of that rite.

“How can the act of *laying* of the fire be regarded as enjoined by
Vedic texts? If what is mentioned in one context were to be taken as
*enjoined* in connection with another, this would lead to a great
confusion regarding the true meaning of the scriptures. What the texts
are actually found to prescribe are the *Fires*; how can that be taken
as prescribing the act of *laying*?”

It is true that the *Fires* have been prescribed by such texts
as—‘Libations are to be offered into the Āhavavīya Fire,’ and so forth;
but, as a matter of fact, these Fires cannot be obtained without
*laying* (*or kindling*); it is for this reason that when the *Fires*
are prescribed, it is understood that the act of *laying* them is also
prescribed.

“If the laying be meant simply for the obtaining of the Fires, then the
injunction would apply to only those persons who perform the rite of
Fire-laying; and not to one who has no fires at all. Nor is the act of
*laying* compulsory, in the way in which the life-long rites are
compulsory. How then win *the omission of Fire-laying* be an offence?”

The passage—‘by not doing what is enjoined, etc., etc.,’—has clearly
laid down that one is liable to expiation if he omits to do what is
enjoined; and the act of Fire-laying has been enjoined by such texts as
‘one shall lay the Fires.’

“It is true that the act has been enjoined; but it is so neither with a
view to the obtaining of heaven, nor for any other purpose; it has been
enjoined only for the purpose of obtaining the Fires. As for the Fires,
their use is well known; so that the man who needs them shall obtain
them by the means thus enjoined,—and others will not obtain them. What
possibility would be there for the *omitting of what has been
enjoined*,—which would render the person liable to Expiation? How can a
man be regarded as an offender if he fails to obtain gold, for
instance?”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—From the present text itself it
is understood that if a man is entitled to Firelaying, he must obtain
the Fires by means of the rites prescribed.

*Theft*—of articles other than those specifically named in this
connection.

^(‘)*Debts*.’—This refers to the non-performance of those acts that have
been laid down as paying off the ‘four debts’ (to the Gods, the Pitṛs,
to Men and to the Fires).

‘*Bad books*’—*e.g*., those written by *Cārvākas* and *Nirgranthas*;
those that are not trustworthy, and have no connection with Vedic rites
or their effects.

‘*Histrionic art*’—acting, dancing and singing.—(65)


