+++
title = "077 हविष्यभुग् वानुसरेत्"

+++
‘*Sacrificial food*.’—Food fit for ascetics; such as *Nīvara* and other
corns; also such village-produce as butter, milk and such things.

‘*Along each stream*.’—Of the Sarasvatī river there are several
branch-streams; and along each one of these he should walk.

‘*With* *food restrained*’—desisting from food.

‘*Text* *of* *the Veda*’—consisting of the ‘mantra’ and ‘Brāhmaṇa’
portions. This he shall repeat thrice.

With regard to these Expiatory Rites, the following is the final
conclusion:—(*A*) In the ease of one intentionally killing a common
Brāhmaṇa, the ‘twelve-year-long penance’ is an alternative to ‘becoming
the target, of armed men.’ The ‘twelve-year-old penance’ does not end in
death; yet, if in the interval the man dies off by chance, the expiation
would have been only half-done, and hence the purification not being
complete, the guilt would not cease;—in the case of the other
alternative, on the other hand, the man becomes freed from sin then and
there; and it would be by sheer chance that the man, struck with arrows,
would not die. Hence, in any particular case, the one or the other
alternative expiation might be prescribed, in accordance with one’s
wish.—(*B*) As regards ‘falling into Fire,’ this should be done only in
cases where the individual Brāhmaṇa killed was endowed with Vedic
learning and such other superior qualities; and this ‘falling’ should be
in the sacrificial fire. They have a saying on this point.—‘For the
Brāhmaṇa-slayer there are three conditions:—(1) dying, (2) cutting off
of limbs with weapons, and (3) consignment to the

Sacrificial fire.’ There can be no duplication in the case of those
penances that end in death; as, during a single life, no one can die
twice. Hence, where such duplication is necessary, it should be secured
by making the man suffer additional torture. In the case of the
‘Twelve-year Penance,’ no such duplication would be right; for what man
is there who would he possessed of the energy of the gods, which would
enable him to perform a rite for twenty-four years? Specially as, if at
the end of a certain year, the man were to die off, the entire expiation
would become frustrated.—(*C*) As regards the Horse-sacrifice
(prescribed in 75), it is an optional alternative permissible for the
three higher castes, only when it is possible for the person concerned
to perform it—(d) As regards the ‘Gosava’ and other sacrifices
(prescribed in 75), these would be admissible only in a case where the
slaying is done unintentionally and the slayer happens to be a highly
qualified person.—(*E*) ‘Walking eight hundred miles’ is admissible in a
case where the killing is done intentionally and the person killed is a
common Brāhmaṇa; and so on with the rest In 75, ‘*tṛvṛtā*’ (triple) is
an epithet of ‘*Agniṣṭutā*.’ Similarly the ‘*Svarjit-gosava*’ and the
‘*Abhijit-Viśvajit*’ constitute two expiatory rites.—(77)


