+++
title = "085 तेषां वेदविदो"

+++
This goes on to describe the necessity of men liable to expiation
presenting themselves before the Congregation or Court; and the
definition of this ‘Court’ is that—‘the Brāhmaṇas learned in the Veda
constitute the Court.’

“It is declared (under 12.110) that the ‘Court should consist of *at
least ten men*,’ or again (12.113)—‘a single person learned in the
Veda.’”

The number ‘ten’ mentioned in the former text does not refer to the
*men*; it refers to their *qualifications*; since in the verse following
we find the qualifications enumerated—‘knowing the three Vedas, a
logician, an exegetist etc., etc.’ (12.111). As regards the ‘single
person learned in the Veda’ (12.113),—what this shows is that, even in
the absence of the other qualifications—of being a logician and so
forth,—if a man possesses the one qualification of *knowing the Veda*,
he becomes qualified for serving on the ‘Court’

The present verse is meant to lay down the exact *number* of men
constituting the ‘Court’ And even though the only qualification
mentioned here is ‘knowledge of the Veda’ yet the others—being a
logician and so forth,—are also understood. As otherwise mere ‘knowledge
of the Veda’ could not be accepted as a definition of the ‘Court.’ All
this we shall explain later on (under XII).

“If Vedic learning is not possible without the knowledge of Logic,
Exegetics and the rest, wherefore has it been said that ‘even a single
man *learned in the Veda* may make up the Court?’”

All that this latter declaration means is that, even in the absence of
all other qualifications, *Vedic learning* alone by itself would
constitute a sufficient qualification. All this we shall explain in
connection with the text in question.

From all this it follows that when a man has incurred the liability to
perform an expiation, he should question three men assembled together;
as a single man is liable to make mistakes or become careles.

This recourse to the ‘Court’ must be taken even by persons who may be
themselves learned; and the reason for this is that—‘*the word of corned
men is purificatory*.’

Nor would this make ‘secret expiation’ impossible. Because in that case
the offence would not be known to any person; and appearing before the
Court is necessary only in cases where the offence has become known. It
is what has been spoken of above (22)—‘By confession, by repentance etc,
etc.’

This explanation, however, is not right What the present verse refers to
is the case where, in the absence of the requisite expiation not having
been clearly laid down, it becomes necessary to assume the right
expiation, ‘on the basis of the man’s capacity, and the nature of the
offence’ (209); and the meaning of the text is that that *assumption* is
to be accepted which is made by three men.—(85)


