+++
title = "087 हत्वा गर्भम्"

+++
‘*Embryo*’—belonging to the *Brāhmaṇa* caste.

The meaning of the verse is that one should not help an abortion.

‘*Unknown*’—whose male or female sex is not yet ascertainable. When this
has become ascertainable, the expiation shall be in accordance with the
sex.

“How can there be a killing of the *embryo*, until the woman is also
killed?”

Abortions are generally secured by the use of medicines and such other
methods.

‘*This same penance*.’—They say that, since the singular number is used
here, it is the ‘Twelve-year Penance’ that is meant here; specially as
this is what has been spoken of in closest proximity to the present
text.

Others, however, have held that the term ‘*this same*’ refers to the
means of purification in general; hence it stands for all the expiatory
rites that have been laid down in connection with ‘Brāhmaṇa-killing.’

‘*A Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya who has performed sacrifices*—*i.e*., who is
engaged in a sacrificial performance;—no significance attaching to the
past tense (in *ijānau*’); as in another *Smṛti* text we read—‘The
Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya seated at the Extraction of Soma’; from which it
would seem that the rule here laid down refers to the persons who have
started the drinking of Soma, and not to those engaged in the
performance of the *Darśapūrṇamāsa* and other sacrifices. But the clear
implication of the Vedic text is that it applies to persons engaged in
any sort of sacrificial performance;—the actual text being ‘it is only
when one has become a *Brāhmaṇa* that he engages *in a sacrifice*’
\[where no particular sacrifice is specified\].

‘A *woman qf the Ātreyī race*.’—Woman born in the race of Atri. The
caste of the man and the woman being the same, what is prescribed in
connection with the killing of ‘a Brāhmaṇa’ should apply equally to the
case of the male and the female; hence the mention of ‘the woman of the
Ātreyī race’ clearly excludes women of the other races; which means that
the killing of these other women of other Brāhmaṇa races, would be only
a ‘minor offence,’ mentioned above as ‘the killing of a woman of a
Vaiśya or a Kṣatriya’ (66). What has been spoken of as ‘the killing of a
woman or of a friend eta, eta,’ refers to women of all the four castes.
The upshot of all this is—that in the case of the killing of a Brāhmaṇa
woman, there are two optional alternatives—the expiation laid down for
‘heinous offences’ and that prescribed for a ‘minor offence’; which one
of the two is to be adopted bring determined by the qualifications of
the husband or of the woman herself,—as also by the intentional or
unintentional character of the crime. For instance, (*a*) even in the
case of a woman of another caste, if she has a child still at her
breast, the expiation shall be of the heavier kind, in consideration of
the fact, that it would be difficult for the child to live after the
mother’s death;—(*b*) in the case of the Brāhmaṇa woman who, faultless
herself, has become an object of hatred to her husband, and is killed by
a man because, on being approached by him, she preserves her chastity
and does not accede to his proposal,—the expiation shall be of the
heavier kind;—as also (*c*) in the case of recklessly killing a friend’s
wife. In other cases on the other hand, ordinary expiation according to
Verse 66 would be applicable In the case of the woman of the ‘*Ātreyī*’
race, however, there are no alternatives.

Others have explained the word ‘*Ātreyī*’ to mean a *woman in her
courses*, on the strength of its occurring along with the term
‘*embryo*.’ They quote the text —‘*pātyate bhrūṇahā, ātreyyāśca
hantā*’—where the term ‘*bhrūṇahā*’ means ‘the slayer of a Brāhmaṇa.’
Under this explanation also the *woman in her courses* referred to must
be a *Brāh* *maṇa*. She is called ‘*Ātreyi*’ in consideration of the
fact that she is sure to carry a child in her womb. Though the use of
the nominal affix found in the term ‘*Ātreyī*’ is nowhere laid down in
the sense here attributed to it, yet the said denotation may be accepted
on the strength of usage.—(87)


