+++
title = "094 गौडी पैष्टी"

+++
‘*Gauḍī*’ is that which is distilled from ‘*Guḍa*,’ molasses. Even
according to those persons who make wine directly from fermented
cane-juice itself, the article distilled is ‘*Gauḍī*’ ‘distilled from
*guḍa*,’ in the sense that the name of the *product*, (*guḍa*, molasses)
is applied to the cause (cane-juice).

The ‘*Mādhvī*’ is that ‘distilled from *madhu*, *grape-juice* i.e., in
its fermented form’; for fresh grape-juice, before it has become
fermented into wine, is not forbidden. This distinctly lays down that it
is the *fermented* grape-juice that is called ‘*Mādhvī*.’ Wherever the
prohibition contains the word ‘*madya*’ (‘intoxicating substance’), it
cannot apply to any substance which has not acquired intoxicating
properties; us such a substance could not be spoken of as ‘*madya*,’
intoxicating substance. A similar case is that of the word ‘*Śukta*’
(‘fermented gruel’) which is applied to the gruel in a certain
condition, and not to gruel in general. So long as the gruel has not
become soured, it is not called ‘*Śukta*.’ In the same manner again, the
calf is not called a ‘bull’ while it is young.

Thus it is that the mixture of grain water and other things does not
come to be called ‘wine,’ so long as it does not imbibe intoxicating
properties, by being kept over night Similarly with cane-juice,
grape-juice and other substances.

“From all this it would follow that the drinking of a small quantity of
wine is permitted—that quantity of it which, if drunk, does not cause
intoxication, or when this is prevented by the use of an antidote.”

There is no force in this objection. The prohibition is not meant to
apply to the bringing about of intoxication; it does not mean, for
instance, that ‘one should act so that he does not become intoxicated or
drunk’; what the prohibition means is that ‘one should not drink that
which possesses the capacity to cause intoxication’; and this capacity
is present in a small quantity of wine also. The mere fact that while
dry and low-spirited wine inebriates even when drunk in small
quantities, that which is soft and high-spirited does not do so even
when drunk in large quantities,—does not prove that there is no
intoxicating power in the latter. Mere absence of effects does not
necessarily prove the absence of the causa For instance, because a
certain quantity of fire is unable to burn a large piece of wood, that
does not prove that the fire does not possess the power to burn;
specially when it is found that it is quite capable of burning dry
grass.

It has been argued that—“it would seem that the drinking of wine is
permitted if its intoxicating properties are counteracted by an
antidote.”

But there is no force in this objection either. For even though the fire
may not burn a heap of grass when it is wet, it does not mean that it
does not possess the power to burn; all that it indicates is that though
the power is there, it is unable to produce its effect But so long as
the power is there, the chance of the effect being produced is always
there.

Then again, no other substance could deprive the wine of its inherent
power of intoxicating; all that it can do is to prevent the effects from
appearing. Thus it is that a man of bilious temperament becomes
intoxicated by the use of even a small quantity of wine, another man of
phlegmatic temperament is not so easily intoxicated. From all this it is
clear that the power is not destroyed in either case.

Thus then the prohibition cannot apply to the substance which is yet to
acquire the intoxicating power. Nor can it be regarded as forbidden
simply because there is prohibition of it as possessing certain definite
characteristics. For instance, in the case of the assertion—‘the thief
should be avoided’ (it is not meant that every man, even before he has
committed theft, shall be avoided). It is for this reason that no
prohibition applies to the gruel before it has become sour.

“How do you explain the form ‘*Mādhvī*’? The correct form should be
‘*Mādhavī*.’”

The answer to this is that rules as applied to proper names are not
compulsory (*Paribhāṣā*, 95); and the authority for this consists of
Pāṇini’s Sūtra 3.4.146.

The use of the term ‘*chief of the twice-born*’ has been used with a
view to permit wine-drinking for the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya. For
instance, the Mahābhārata describes wine as drunk by the Yadāvas and the
Bhāratas:—‘Both Keśava and Arjuna were found by me to be drunk with
wine,’—which is a declamatory assertion pointing to the same fact “Why
is then the plural form in ‘*so all*?’”

Two of them are the substances *likened* and one is that to which those
are likened.

The mention of wine being the ‘dirty refuse of grains’ is meant to be a
declamatory assertion producing a reason for what has been prescribed;
just as in the case of the text ‘*Śūrpeṇa juhoti tena hi annam
kriyate*.’—(94)


