+++
title = "109 चतुर्थकालम् अश्नीयाद्"

+++
‘*For two months*’—he shall take his food once and then again only in
the evening of the next day.

If we take the term ‘*Kṣāra*’—‘*pungent*’—as a qualification of
‘*lavaṇa*,’ ‘salt,’ we secure the prohibition of the rock-salt also. If
the two terms were independent, the compound would be a copulative one,
and this would mean the prohibition of ‘pungent substances’ also; and in
that case it would be necessary to take the *singular* number as
indirectly indicating the *dual*; as we have the copulative compound
only, both the components are equally important at one and the same
time. When however, the compound is taken as a ‘qualitative’ one
(‘pungent’ being a qualification of the ‘salt’), we obtain a qualified
denotation.

‘*Limited*’—small; *i.e*., that which, without producing full
satisfaction, is enough to keep the body going.

‘*Bathing in cow’s urine*’ is to be done three times a day.

‘*At the fourth meal-time*’ is to be construed with ‘*for* *two
months*.’

In another Smṛti we read—‘Having shaved his head, covered with the skin,
he shall live in the cow-pen; end bathing in cow’s urine for two months
has been prescribed for him; it is only the washing of the feet that he
should do with water.’ In this it is not possible to connect the
*bathing in cow’s urine* with the phrase ‘*for two months*.’ The mention
of the *feet* is only for the purpose of filling up the metre; for, if
any impurity happens to attach to the man’s feet during the time that he
is bathing, it would naturally be washed with water only; as is clearly
laid down by the rules of purification. Hence at the time of bathing,
the rinsing of the mouth also should he done with water; at other times
purification may be secured by the use of clay and other cleansing
substances; and this would have to be done in the natural order—water
being used after clay has been applied. And since cow’s urine has been
prescribed for *bathing* only, what possibility would there be of its
being used for the rinsing of the mouth or any such purpose? In
connection with bathing, it is only as an expiation that the use of
cow’s urine has been prescribed.—(109)


