+++
title = "116 वृषभैकादशा गाश्"

+++
**(verses 11.115-116)**

He shall give ten cows and one bull.

He shall perform all the four penances, if he is capable of doing so.

If the said property is not available, he may give away all that he
possesses, even if this be less than the prescribed gift

‘*To persons learned in the Veda*’;—*i.e*, to several persons, not to
one or two only. In fact, this term itself has been added only with a
view to lay down *plurality*; since it is only *persons learned in the
Veda* who have been declared to be fit recipients for gifts.

In another *Smṛti* we read:—“If a cow happens to die through one’s
burning fire, carrying, tying, applying the rope-noose, or the
administration of some oil or medicine,—he shall shave his whole head,
perform the ‘*Prājāpatya*’ penance, and then give away a piece of
cloth.”

But this is an expiation for those cases where one does these acts
rather recklessly and hence his offence is due to negligence. Since we
find it laid down that—(*a*) ‘In tying or in medicating or in helping
her in calving, if one has taken all possible care and the cow dies,
there shall be no expiatory rite’; and (*b*) ‘If when one has
administered a medicine or oil or food to the cow or the Brāhmaṇa, and
death ensues, the man does not become tainted with guilt’ (*Saṃvarta*).

Another text lays down an expiation lasting for a month:—“He shall drink
the mixture of five products of the cow, and milk at the sixth
meal-time;—and at the end he shall satisfy the Brāhmaṇas with gifts and
give away sesamum and a cow.”

There is yet another, lasting for a fortnight:—“He shall eat only once,
fried flour, or barley-flour, or vegetables, or milk, or cards, or
butter.” The various articles mentioned here are so many optional
alternatives, as we shall explain later on; but the whole process is to
be carried through with the same substance with which it has been begun;
and one shall not eat fried flour on one day and barley-flour on the
other. For instance, even though ‘*Vrīhi*’ and ‘*Yava*’ have been laid
down as optional alternatives, yet, when once a performance has been
begun with *Vrīhi*, if it happens to run short in the middle, *Yava* is
used, only as a substitute; and it is with a substitute that the rite is
regarded as having been completed; in view of this deficiency in the
performance, the giving away of a cow has been prescribed. Thus then, in
the case in question also, the penances are as described, and if any
other optional alternative is adopted, a cow with calf should be given.

It has been asserted in Gautama’s work —‘*Gām vaiśyavat*’ (22.18)
\[which means that for killing a cow, one should perform the
Three-year-Penance and give away ten cows and a bull\]; and this rule of
Gautama’s pertains to the case where a Vedic scholar, learned in
sacrificial rituals and an *Agṇihotrin* kills a milch cow with a young
calf, belonging to a poor man. This same penance is to be done in its
‘one year’ form if the cow dies by chance, when the man, finding her in
a field or a garden eating corns, runs after her with a view to prevent
it, taking due care not to harm her. It is to be the
‘Three-year-Penance’ in the case of the intentional killing of a dry and
old cow belonging to one who is not a Vedic scholar. And the
‘*Prājāpatya*’ penance is to be performed in the case of the
unintentional killing of a cow devoid of all good points and belonging
to an owner devoid of all qualities; and in the case of the killing of a
similar cow intentionally, it is to be the
‘Three-year-Penance.’—(115-116)


