+++
title = "124 जातिभ्रंशकरङ् कर्म"

+++
The treatment of Minor Offences has been finished.

‘*Any one*.’—This is only by way of reference; as a combination of
occasions is not possible; and further, if all the offences were meant
to be taken together, the expiation here spoken of would not be meant
for any one; what man is there who could ever commit all those deeds
that lead to the loss of caste? On the other hand, if expiation were to
be prescribed separately for each offence, there would be no end to the
teaching at all Nor would combination be otherwise advisable; as the
occasions and conditions of the expiation are set forth only as
qualifying the human agent For these reasons the declaration should be
taken as complete with each individual offence. Just as in connection
with the assertion ‘he whose father or grandfather has not drunk Soma
(shall perform a certain expiatory rite),’—the conclusion is that the
expiatory Animal-sacrifice becomes necessary when either one of the
ancestors—the father or the grandfather—has failed to drink *Soma*;—and
similarly in the declaration—‘when *both* sacrificial materials become
spoilt, etc.,’—even though it contains the term ‘both,’ yet the
expiatory ‘*Pañcaśarāva*’ sacrifice has to be performed even when only
one material becomes spoilt. The same principle is to be observed in the
case of all expiations.

‘*Intentionally*.’—This is meant to be emphasised; as also the
qualification ‘*unintentionally*.’

The exact form of the two penances, ‘Prājāpatya’ and ‘Sāntapana,’ shall
be described later on.—(124)


