+++
title = "131 मार्जार-नकुलौ हत्वा"

+++
Inasmuch as the expiation prescribed is a heavy one, it should be
understood as applying to a case where *all* these animals have been
killed.

“It has been asserted in connection with offences leading to loss of
caste, etc., that a combination is not meant. How too is it ever
possible for all these animals to come up before any one man and be
killed? If only some of these were present, the required conditions
would not be there; in fact it would become a wholly different case.
Hence the person meant should be one who has killed one of these animals
*repeatedly*. But there is nothing in the text, to show that this is
what is meant Nor can the expiation be taken as referring to the killing
of each single animal, as there is in the case of such assertion as ‘one
should drink milk, etc., etc.’” (132)

Thus then, the sentence cannot be taken either as referring to each of
the animals severally, or as referring to all of them together; nor is
there any third way possible.

It has been said that a *combination cannot* be meant. If a combination
is not meant, then the only way in which the text could be taken would
be to take it as referring to each individual singly; just as there is
in the case of the assertion ‘he whose father or grandfather has not
drunk the Soma, etc., etc.’ But in a case (like the present) where it is
found that the whole sentence becomes meaningless if it is not taken as
referring to a combination of all the individuals, it is only right
that, with a view to avoid such a contingency, the sentence should be
taken as referring to such combination; for instance, in the case of the
text—‘In the case of killing a thousand animals etc.’ (140),—if a
combination were not meant, the mention of the specific number
‘thousand’ would be meaningless. It is only when, if the sense adopted
happens to be very much contrary to what has been laid down in other
scriptural texts, that such a sense can be rejected.

“But even in a case where a certain idea is expressed directly by the
words of the text, no significance is ever meant to be attached to the
qualifications involved in its indirect implication; for instance, in
the ease of the assertion—‘he whose both sacrificial materials become
spoilt, etc.’—significance is not meant to be attached to the exact
denotation of the term ‘both.’ In this sentence there are two terms
‘both’ and ‘sacrificial material’; and if significance is attached to
both these terms, there results syntactical split, as we shall explain
later on. When however it is doubtful whether in a given case
significance attaches to the ‘material’ or the ‘both’—the two have to be
taken separately, in order to avoid the syntactical split; or what is
predicated in the sentence has to be taken as having no connection with
one of the two terms. Now what is in closest proximity to the predicate
‘becomes spoilt’ is the term ‘material,’—as is clear from the fact that
its *number* is more in keeping with that of this term; so that the
other term becomes reiterative of the qualification of the ‘material.’
If on the other hand, no significance attaches to the term ‘material,’
then, the rest of the sentence can be taken only as declamatory. In the
case in question, if a combination wore meant to be expressed, or if
stress were to be laid upon the term ‘thousand’ (in 140), the whole
sentence would become meaningless. So that all that the passage would
mean is that—‘one should perform the penance of the
Śūdra-killer......(?),’ and that ‘the act of killing these is similar to
the killing of a Śūdra,’ and all that this would secure would he that;
these few animals would not he killed (?)”

On the principle here enunciated, we might regard other qualifications
also as not meant to be emphasised; for instance under Verse 142. And
all this would lead to a deal of incongruity. Then again the passage we
are dealing with is the work of a human author, and it does not belong
to the Veda. In the case of a Vedic passage, whose usage would it
represent? And whom could we charge with having made use of a
meaningless assertion? In the case of a passage like the present one, on
the other hand, which is the conscious work of a human author, if there
is an incongruity in regard to even a single syllable, the writer
becomes at once open to the charge of having made use of a meaningless
expression.

For all these reasons the only right course is to regard *combination*
and its qualification as both equally meant to be significant.

As regards the argument that there can be no possibility of so many
animals being killed at one and the same time,—it is quite possible for
those who go on hunting excursions and who follow the profession of
setting fire to forests.

Lastly as regards the argument, that if even a single one of these
several animals is not killed, there would be no occasion for the
prescribed expiation,—this also is not right. For just as in the case of
the killing of more animals than those enumerated, so also in that of
killing fewer than those, a proper adjustment of the requisite expiation
can always be made.—(131)


