+++
title = "132 पयः पिबेत्"

+++
Other expiations are now laid down for the killing of any one of the
animals mentioned.

The term ‘*payaḥ*’ stands here for *milk*, and not *water*, though it
denotes both; just as it does in the passage ‘*payasā juhoti*’ (‘offers
milk’). As an analogous case we have the term ‘*varāha*,’ which, though
signifying both *clouds* and the *boar*, is more often used in the sense
of the latter; though this term ‘*varāha*’ signifies *mountain* also,
yet whenever it is used in this sense, it stands in need of some
co-ordinating term-such as ‘*Himavān-varāhaḥ*,’ (‘Himālaya Mountain’),
‘*varāhaḥ pāriyātraḥ*,’ (‘Pāriyātru Mountain’), and so forth.

In the case in question, it being dear that what the text mentions is an
article of food, by which the body could be maintained,—if we find the
term ‘*payas*,’ milk, it means that all other articles of food are to be
eschewed. This also is the right view to take in view of the fact that
what is meant, to be prescribed is a *penance*, ‘*tapas*,’—a *tapas*
being that which *causes pain* (*tāpayati*). This name ‘*tapas*’ is
given to such acts as the eating of clarified butter after *Prānāyāma*;
this, however, does not exclude the eating of other things, nor the
rinsing of the mouth, which would make the eating of clarified butter
along with something else impossible.

Nor can *water* be taken as an optional alternative for *milk* (both
being denoted by the term ‘*payas*’); what does form such an alternative
is that ‘*he* *shall bathe* *in a stream*,’ so that ‘drinking of milk,’
‘walking over 800 miles’ and ‘bathing in a stream’ are the possible
alternatives. The stress laid upon the terra ‘*stream*’ excludes the
bathing in tanks and pools.

‘*Sacred to the Waters*’—*i.e*., the ‘*Pavamāna*’ hymn beginning with
the verse ‘*Āpohiṣṭhā mayobhuvaḥ, etc., etc*.’

Another *Smṛti* text lays down also the eating of mixed food, and the
giving of an iron-rod as a gift,.

‘*Walk*’—not by way of travelling to a certain place; but walking on
foot (by way of penance).—(132)


