+++
title = "146 अज्ञानाद् वारुणीम्"

+++
Inasmuch as in connection with this ‘Initiation,’ the use of the
girdle-zone and other things has been forbidden, it follows that it
stands here for ‘Initiation’; and on the strength of another Smṛti-text,
this should be accompanied by the ‘*Tapta-kṛcchra*’ penance. Says
Gautama—‘In the case of unintentional drinking of wine, one should live
for three days upon milk, clarified butter, water and air, performing
the Tapta-kṛcchra,—then should follow his Initiation’ (23.2).

The ‘*wine*’ meant here is not that which is distilled from grains, but
those that are distilled from molasses and honey.

“From what does this follow?”

It follows from what we learn from another Smṛti-text—‘The Brāhmaṇa who
unintentionally drinks wine *other than that distilled from grains*,
becomes pure by subsisting, for ten days, on cow’s urine, and
barley-products.’ So that in the case of the unintentional drinking of
wine distilled from grains, there is to be an ordinary form of expiation
(and not Re-initiation),—either in the one form of the penance involving
the subsisting for one year on pieces of grain, or in the performance of
the ‘Chāndrāyaṇa.’

In the case of the *intentional* drinking of even the two kinds of wine
(that distilled from molasses and that distilled from honey), the
aforesaid expiation should not be prescribed; in such a case, the
expiation should be one that brings about the death of the offender.

“What expiation would this be?”

The same that has been prescribed above for the drinking of the wine
that is distilled from grains, which is the most important form of wine.

This, however, should be understood to apply to cases of *repeated*
drinking (of the two kinds of wine); since for *once* drinking wines
*other than that distilled from grains*, the performance of the
*Cāndrāyaṇa* penance has been laid down.

Thus the ‘*settled law*’ on this point is as follows:—(*a*) If one
drinks intentionally the wine distilled from grains, there should be a
penance ending in death;—(*b*) if he drinks that same wine
unintentionally, and once only, he should live upon pieces of grain and
perform the *Cāndrāyaṇa*;—(*c*) if he does it unintentionally, but
repeatedly, then it shall be just as in the case of intentional
drinking;—(*d*) in the case of the intentional drinking of other wines,
one should perform the *Cāndrāyaṇa*;—(*e*) in the case of the
unintentional drinking of these, once only, there should be the
‘*Tapta-kṛcchra*’ Initiation and subsisting on cow’s urine and
barley-products;—and (*f*) in the case of unintentional, but repeated,
drinking of these, it shall be just as in the case of the wine distilled
from grains.—(146)


