+++
title = "156 क्रव्याद-सूकरोष्ट्राणाङ् कुक्कुटानाम्"

+++
The particle ‘*ca*’ indicates that the previous verse
([154](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc202045.html))
also is to be construed with the present one; so that for the eating of
the meat of the village-pig and other animals mentioned therein, this
same should be the expiation.

And the second ‘*ca*’ indicates that the expiation for swallowing the
ordure or urine of carnivorous and other animals (mentioned in the
present verse), would be the same as that in the case of that of the
village-pig and other animals ([mentioned in
154](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc202045.html));
but with this difference that in another *Smṛti*, what is laid down in
the present verse is found to be applied to the case of *all men*; hence
so far as the present verse is concerned, no significance can be
attached to the specification of ‘twice-born men’ ([in
154](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc202045.html)),
where it is said that ‘the twice-born man shall perform the Cāndrāyaṇa.’

Thus these two verses
([154](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc202045.html)
and 156) should be taken along with [Verse
159](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc202050.html);
so that the eating of what has been touched by the mouth of these
animals (mentioned in the present verse) shall be treated on the same
footing as the eating of things touched with the mouth of the cat and
other animals ([mentioned in
159](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc202050.html)).

On the same ground, the ordure and urine of all the animals (mentioned
in the three verses) become forbidden; so that the expiation for the
swallowing of the ordure and urine of the cat and other animals
([mentioned in
159](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc202050.html))
would be the same as that for the swallowing of those of the carnivorous
and other animals (mentioned in the present verse).—(156)


