+++
title = "162 धान्यान्न-धनचौर्याणि कृत्वा"

+++
‘*Chief of twice-born men*’— This is only illustrative; it includes the
Kṣatriya and the rest also; but inasmuch as the text has used the term
‘*chief of twice-born men*,’ the phrase ‘*from the house of a
caste-fellow*’ is understood to signify *from the house of a Brāhmaṇa*.
Hence the meaning comes to be this:—‘Men of all castes, on stealing
wealth from the house of a Brāhmaṇa, would become pure by performing the
*Kṛcchra* for one year.’

The term ‘*wealth*’ including all kinds of property, ‘grains’ and
‘cooked food’ have been specially mentioned, for the purpose of
indicating the better quality of grains; as for the stealing of grains
of inferior quality, another expiation is going to be prescribed; from
which it follows that what is here laid down applies to the stealing of
the more important varieties of grains of superior quality.

“From among the various castes, if the Brāhmaṇa steals the property of
other castes, what shall be the expiation?”

It shall be computed at the ‘fourth,’ the ‘eighth’ and other parts of
what is here prescribed; just as we have found in the ease of murder
(sec. 127). That is, when the Brāhmaṇa steals the property of a
Kṣatriya, he shall perforin the Kṛcchra or three months; in the case of
the property of a Vaiśya, for a month and a half, and in that of a
Śūdra, for twenty-two days.

“What is the quantity of grains, the stealing of which would make one
liable to the said expiation?”

More than,—or even a little less than—ten jarfuls. That such is the
meaning is indicated by the heaviness of the expiation prescribed.

A similar computation may he made in regard to ‘*wealth*’ also.

‘*Intentionally*.’— This is added only for the purpose of filling up the
verse; as there can be no *unintentional* stealing of what belongs to
another.

‘*Grains*’—Vrīhi and the rest,

‘*Cooked food*’—grains and meat

When every one of the three tilings is stolen, the *Kṛcchra* should be
performed for three years.

Some people take the expiation here laid down as meant for the stealing
of all the three things mentioned, on the ground that it is a very heavy
one.—(162)


