+++
title = "170 गुरुतल्पव्रतङ् कुर्याद्"

+++
Even though the text speaks generally of ‘the penance prescribed for the
violation of the Preceptor’s Bed,’ without any qualifications, yet it
does not mean the application to the present case of what has been said
regarding ‘sleeping on a redhot iron-bedstead,’ and so forth (under
Verse 104); what it does mean, however, is the performing for one year
of the ‘Prājāpatya penance,’ which has been laid down in Verse 106. That
such must be the meaning is clear from the fact that the violating of
the Preceptor’s Bed is a ‘heinous offence’; and apart from the ‘heinous
offences,’ there is no penance leading to death; though there may be
this in cases of repetition (of non-heinous offences also).

‘*Svayoni*’—uterine sister.

‘*Wife of a friend*.’—The consort of a loving friend; what constitutes
the seriousness of this offence is the affectionate regard of the
friend, and not any blood-relationship, nor any such qualification of
the husband as Vedic learning and the like.

Similarly in the case of ‘*the wife of his son*’—the daughter-in-law.

‘*Unmarried maiden*’—of other castes also. This is meant to refer to
intercourse with those who have not yet been given away by their
fathers, and who have not surrendered themselves through love,—the
intercourse being entirely by force.

In connection with this also, the exact penance shall be regulated by
several considerations. Though the text has added no qualifications to
the general application of the law relating to the ‘violation of the
Preceptor’s bed,’ yet in any two cases there may be two distinct
penances, as is actually found to be the case. For instance, on account
of the comparative heaviness or lightness of the offence, there would,
in the case of women of the lower castes, be the performance of the
*Cāndrāyaṇa* for three months, which would be lighter than that of the
*Kṛcchra* for one year (which would have to be done in the case of other
women).

‘*Lowest-born* ’—*Caṇḍāla* and *Mleccha* women. In the case of *Caṇḍāla*
women, a distinction in the penance has to be made on the ground of the
act being intentional or unintentional,—as is clear from other *Smṛti*
texts. For instance, in the case of women of the ‘*antyāvasāya*’ caste,
the penance would be a ‘Half-Kṛcchra,’ while in others, it would be one
lasting for twelve days.—(170)


