+++
title = "173 अमानुषीषू पुरुष"

+++
‘*Non-human females*’—the mare and the like.

Though the *cow* also is ‘non-human,’ yet in connection with it, a
distinct expiation has been laid down by Gautama (23. 12-13).—‘For
intercourse with a friend, a sister, a woman of the same *gotra*, the
wife of the pupil, the daughter-in-law, and the cow, the expiation shall
be equal to that for the violation of the Preceptor’s bed, or that for
the immoral religions student.’ Between the two optional alternative
expiations laid down by Gautama, viz., that prescribed for violating the
Preceptor’s bed and that for the immoral religious student,—one has to
be taken as pertaining to cases where the act has been intentional, and
the other to those in which it has been unintentional.

In Gautama’s text, the term used is simply ‘*talpa*’ (bed), which, in
view of the context in which it occurs, must be taken as standing for
the ‘*gurutalpa*’ (Preceptor’s Bed);—and the term ‘*avakara*’ should be
taken as standing for ‘avakīrṇa’ ‘Immorality,’ which, being the cause of
the expiation, indicates the *expiation* itself. The word ‘*sakhī*’
(friend) in Gautama’s text stands for a woman with whom friendship has
been contracted in the same-manner as with men; and it does not mean
‘the wife of a friend’; since the feminine affix here does not denote
relation to the corresponding masculine; nor can this term be construed
with the term ‘wife’ (coming later); since between the two we have the
term ‘*sayoni*’ (sister). Vaśiṣṭha also uses the term in the same sense
in the passage—‘*Gurvī, sakhī*, eta’

‘*Menstruating woman*’—the woman who is in her monthly courses.

Another reading is ‘*pītvādharam puruṣaḥ*, *etc*.’ The sense remains the
same.

‘*Ayoni*’—a place other than the female organ.

Some people read (for ‘*jale chaiva*’) ‘*jale khe ca*’ \[which means ‘in
water and in *Ākāśa*’\].

‘The *Ākāśa* being already included in the term ‘*ayoni*,’ ‘places other
than the female organ,’—it need not be mentioned (by means of the word
‘*khe*’); as ‘*kha*’ stands for *Ākāśa*, which certainly is ‘a place
other than the female organ.’ There is no force in this objection. As
some people think that the presence of the term ‘*yoni*’ (in the
compound term ‘*ayoni*’) indicates that the term stands for *other parts
of the ‘body*’ \[and under this view, the mention of *Ākāśa* would not
be superfluous\].

‘*In water*’—directly.—(173)


