+++
title = "175 चण्डालान्त्यस्त्रियो गत्वा"

+++
There is expiation for approaching, for eating the food of, and
accepting gifts from, women of the ‘*Caṇḍāla*’ caste, as also of the
‘Mleccha’ tribes inhabiting the boundaries of the land.

‘*Becomes an outcast*.’—All that this means is that the expiation shall
be heavier than the ‘performance of the *Kṛcchra* for one year,’—and not
that the man actually becomes an *outcast*.

The partaking of the ‘food’ has been mentioned here for the purpose of
indicating that the expiation in this case shall be the ‘performance of
the *Kṛcchra* for one year,’ and not that which has been laid down in
connection with ‘the eating of the food of persons whose food should not
be eaten’ ([Verse
152](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc202043.html)).

Similarly the ‘*receiving of gifts*’ also has been mentioned here for
the purpose of indicating the said *Kṛcchra* as the expiation, and not
‘the drinking of milk in a cow-pen for a month’ (which is going to be
prescribed in Verse 194 below).

‘*If he does it intentionally, he becomes her equal*.’—This is only a
declamatory assertion intended to lay down an expiation. What has been
asserted in another *Smṛti* text regarding the expiation for the
intentional and unintentional act, has already been explained; how then
could it be taken as meant to imply a heavier expiation?

‘*Saving taken food*.’—“With what is this to be construed?”

With the term ‘*Caṇḍāla or other lowest-born caste*!

“But this term is the subordinate factor in the compound
(‘*Caṇḍalāntyastriyaḥ*,’ where ‘*strī*,’ ‘woman,’ is the predominant
factor).”

It has been often shown that a subordinate factor also may be construed
with other words, when the sense demands it. The text having said
‘having taken the food,’—and the question arising as to whose food is
meant,—as no one else is mentioned in the text, it naturally follows
that it has to be taken with^(‘)the Caṇḍāla and other lowest-born
castes.’ The sense thus comes to be this—‘If one eats the food of the
Caṇḍāla and the Mleccha,—and if he receives gifts from them,—and
approaches their women, etc., etc.’

The expiation here laid down is for approaching the woman only once. In
the event of the act being repeated, the offender must become ‘equal’ to
the woman, on account of his being disqualified (from all the privileges
of his own caste). The sin of the repeated acts could not be atoned for
by means of expiations; for every cause would have its effect; and all
the expiatory rites—necessary for the atoning of the sin of the repeated
acts—could not be performed during a single life-time.’—(175)


