+++
title = "176 विप्रदुष्टां स्त्रियम्"

+++
If she is ‘*particularly corrupt the husband should keep her
confined*’—*i.e*., keep her away from all the duties of a wife’ such as
‘the collecting of wealth’ and so forth (described under 9.11).

‘*In one room*’—*i.e*., she should be kept in chains, and should not be
permitted to roam about at will in her husband’s house.

While thus confined, she should be made to perform the necessary
expiation.

“What expiation?”

‘*That penance which, has been prescribed for males in cases of
adultery*’—that is, in the case of a Brāhmaṇa, adultery, when committed
upon a woman of equal or inferior castes, is to be treated as a ‘minor
offence,’ which involves the corresponding expiation. So also in the
case of men of other castes; but when these latter commit the act on a
woman of a superior caste, the expiation for the Vaiśya shall be double;
it shall be triple in the case of a Kṣatriya misbehaving with a Brāhmaṇa
woman. But for a Vedic scholar, the expiation shall be trebled;—when a
Śūdra misbehaves with a Brāhmaṇa woman, the expiation is that which has
been prescribed for ‘heinous offences’;—when a Vaiśya misbehaves with a
Kṣatriya woman, it is to be treated as a ‘minor offence.’ All this
distinction has been explained under ‘Punishments,’ The rules regarding
women misbehaving with men of inferior castes shall be the same as those
relating to men misbehaving with women of superior castes.

But though the offence may be equal, the corresponding expiation for
women shall be only *half* (of what is prescribed for males);—‘women and
sick men, boys up to the sixteenth year of age and men after or beyond
the eightieth year are subject to only one-half of the prescribed
expiation’—says a text

The expiation is lighter in the case of a woman whose unchastity is well
known. For instance, if one misbehaves with an unchaste low-caste woman,
he should bathe along with his clothes and give a water-jar to a
Brāhmaṇa; and if with a similar Vaiśya woman, he should take food at the
fourth meal-time and feed Brāhmaṇas; if with a Kṣatriya woman, he should
fast for three days and should give a *yavāṭaka*. It has also been
declared that he may be treated like a Vaiśya. The same should be
understood to be the case with the wife of a Śūdra. In connection with
people having intercourse with women during their courses or bringing
about their conception, it has been declared that—‘if women of the
Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya and Vaiśya castes, have intercourse with a Śūdra,
they could be purified by expiations, if they have not conceived,—not
otherwise.’

In the case of women who have not been wedded by any one, and live by
prostitution, it is doubtful whether or not an expiation is necessary
for having intercourse with them.

“Why should there be any such doubt?”

Because the term ‘*dāra*,’ ‘wife,’ connotes consecration (a woman who
has passed through the sacrament of marriage); and when no marriage has
been performed, the woman cannot be called any one’s ‘wife and
expiations are necessary only in the case of intercourse with the
‘*wife*’ *of another person*. This would lead us to the conclusion that
in the case in question no expiation is needed. On the other band, since
it has been laid down that ‘one should remain attached *to his own*
wife,’ we think that there should be expiation in the case in question
(as it involves infidelity to one’s own wife).

“What then is the right view on this point?”

The right view is that expiation *is* necessary.

“Why so?”

Because the restriction (that one should he devoted to his own wife) has
been directly *enjoined*, and expiation has been declared to be
necessary in the case of one’s omitting to do what has been *enjoined*
(11.41). Even though the offence may not fall under the category of
‘minor offences,’ yet that does not mean that there is to be no
expiation. The various kinds of offences—‘minor offences,’ ‘offences
leading to loss of caste,’ and so forth—have been enumerated, not by way
of an exhaustive list (of offences requiring expiation), but only for
the purpose of indicating the necessary expiations. The condition common
to all offences has been summed up as—‘omitting to do what is enjoined,
etc., etc.’ (11.44). The ease of the ‘wanton’ woman has been already
explained, and the prostitute also is an ‘unchaste woman.’

“As a matter of fact, only that woman is to be called ‘another’s wife,’
‘*paradāra*’ (in connection with the present context) who has
intercourse with the paternal or maternal relations of her husband; and
such women become known as ‘wanton,’ when they have intercourse with
several men.”

True; but to the prostitute also, the term ‘*svairiṇī*,’ ^(‘)wanton,’ is
applicable on the basis of her *wantonness or want of self-control*.

Hence in the case of these, there should he both, bathing along with
clothes, and also the giving of a water-jar.

In connection with adultery some people hold the following opinion—The
avoiding of sexual intercourse is of the nature of a *vow*, and as such
pertains, not to all men, but to the Accomplished Student; as it is in
reference to him that the texts have set forth the section beginning
with the words^(‘)now his vow,’ and ending with—^(‘)these vows he shall
keep.’—(176)


