+++
title = "177 सा चेत्"

+++
‘*On being solicited*’ by a man of equal caste,—if she happens to have
sexual intercourse again, then, inasmuch as this would be a ‘minor
offence,’ the ‘*Cāndrāyaṇa*’ would be the natural expiation for her.
Even so, the Cāndrāyaṇa has been mentioned again in the present verse,
in order to imply that the other expiations prescribed for ‘cow-killing’
(which is a typical ‘minor offence’) are not applicable in the present
case,—and also that the complete *Cāndrāyaṇa* has to be performed.

Though the latter half of the verse would seem to imply that
‘intercourse with all women apart from one’s own wife involves the same
expiation,’ yet as a matter of fact, such is not the case; as special
penalties have been laid down in connection with the following
women:—‘mother, mother’s sister, mother-in-law, maternal aunt, father’s
sister, wife of the paternal uncle, wife of a friend, wife of a pupil,
sister, sister’s friend, daughter-in-law, daughter, teacher’s wife, a
woman belonging to one’s own *gotra*, a woman-refugee, a queen, a
mendicant woman, a chaste woman, one’s nurse, a woman belonging to a
higher caste.’ From among these, as regards the mother, the proper
expiation has been already explained (under the ‘heinous offence’of
‘Violating the Preceptor’s Bed’);—in connection with those beginning
with the ‘mother’s sister’ and ending with ‘daughter,’ the expiation
shall he the performance of the *Kṛcchra* penance for one year;—and in
the case of the rest, the performance of *Cāndrāyaṇa*.

*Question*—“Those that have been mentioned here as belonging to the same
*gotra*,—does this mean those that are born in the same *gotra* as the
man? Or those that have been married to the same *gotra*?”

The answer to this is that both are meant; since we find texts
indicative of both views.

‘*Gotra*’ means *family, paternal line*; and if *women of the same
paternal line* be meant, then the separate mention of the ‘father’s
sister,’ would be superfluous, as she ‘belongs to the same paternal
line.’ If, on the other hand, the woman he held to be one who belongs to
the *gotra* of the person to whom she has been united, then they should
be spoken of as belonging to their husband’s *gotra*; and in that case,
the separate mention of the‘wife of the paternal uncle’ becomes
superfluous; as in the said sense she would he ‘of the same *gotra*’ as
the man concerned. Thus then, there being nothing to indicate which one
of these two views is meant, we take the term as referring to both. The
common view, however, is that what are meant here are women whose
husband’s *gotra* is the same as that of the man concerned.

Some people have hold that—“In connection with the performance of
Śrāddhas, women belong to their father’s *gotra*.” But this is
restricted to *Śrāddhas* only. Or, we may take it as referring to other
cases also, if we find a text, directly saying so.—(177)


