+++
title = "178 यत् करोत्य्"

+++
The term ‘*vṛṣalī*’ here stands for the *Caṇḍālī*.

Since the expiation prescribed is a heavy one, it should be understood
as meant, for the act done intentionally and repeated twice. In other
cases the expiation would consist in the performance of the *Kṛcchra*
for one year.

Since the text contains the term ‘*for* *one night*,’ what is said here
must ho taken as referring to a man who sleeps with the woman and spends
the whole night with her.

‘*Dallying*’ means *enjoyment*.

The term ‘*vṛṣalī*’ has been used here as a deprecatory word, and not in
the sense of the particular caste (*Caṇḍāla*).

‘*What he commits*’—The sin that he brings on.

‘*That he wipes off in three years*’—destroys it.

‘*Lining on alms and constantly repeating sacred texts*.’—As no
particular texts have been specified, they say that the words repeated
should he expressive of his deed (?). Others, however, have held that
the words repeated shall bo, not ordinary ones, but those occurring in
the *Mantra* and *Brāhmaṇa* texts, to be selected according to the man’s
own predilections. That this is so follows from the fact that, where the
*repeating of the sacred texts of the Ṛg-Veda* has been prescribed (in
11.262) as a general moans of purification, no particular texts have
been specified.

Some people explain the term ‘*vṛṣalī*’ as standing for the *Śūdra*
woman, and declare that dallying with her for three months is what is
meant.

But this cannot be right. Because marrying a Śūdra woman is not
permitted; and as for a wanton woman, the expiation in her case is a
light one; and intercourse with other kinds of Śūdra women would fall
under the category of ‘Minor Offences,’ for which the expiation laid
down in the present verse would be too heavy.—(178)


