+++
title = "181 यो येन"

+++
For the atonement of the sin of associating with an outcast, the same
expiation is to be performed which has been prescribed for that outcast
himself.

In ‘*eṣam*,’ ‘*of these*,’ the Genitive has the sense of *selection*;
the sense being—‘From among these outcasts, if a man associates with any
one,—in the manner described in the preceding verse,—he should perform
that same expiation which has been prescribed for that same outcast;—for
the purpose of purifying—removing—the sin begotten by that association.’

This last phrase ‘*for the purpose*, etc.,’ serves only to fill up the
metre.

As a rule, a man becomes *degraded* (an outcast) by repeatedly doing
such degrading acts as not renouncing the company of outcasts. Now there
arises the question—Does this mean that the *degradation*—the
*outcastness*—that attaches itself to the associating person is
direct,—or is it only the degradation of the outcast that becomes
attributed to him indirectly? If it is something new, then it behoves
you to point out the authority for the assertion that ‘there are *five
heinous offences*.’ If it be held that in the case of the five, the
degradation is *direct*, while in that of others it is *indirect*,—then
there would be no point in making any such distinction. The acts being
the same, the expiations being the same, what would be the use for
attributing the degradation in one case, only *indirectly*?

*Objection*—Some people argue as follows:—“Usage does not always vary
with purposes only, it varies on other grounds also. In the present case
the distinction is based upon authoritative texts: For instance, in a
case where, having asserted *degradation*, the text goes on to explain
it as consisting in being deprived of the rights of twice-born
men,—*e.g*., in 182 below,—as the character is mentioned as belonging to
the man himself, the *degradation* is *direct*; on the other hand, where
the character is spoken of—either by name or by indicative words,—as due
to relations with the outcast, it is *indirect*. For instance, in
connection with the names ‘*Saurya*’ and ‘*Āgneya*,’ no characteristic
of the terms ‘*Sūrya*’ and ‘*Agni*’ is found to have been declared as
belonging to the *Saurya* and the *Āgneya*, on the basis whereof there
could be any transference of details from one to the other, which could
bestow any peculiar character on them. (*Vide* Mīmāṃsa-Sūtra,
8.1.27-31).’

“This, however, is not right; because in the case cited, the terms
‘*Sūrya*’ and the rest are all-powerful, since they form part of the
Veda, which is not the work of an author. The present treatise on the
other hand, is the work of a human author, and how can any such author
propound a distinction which does not exist in fact? There may be some
kinds of distinction which may be admitted, when not opposed to
well-known Perception or Inference. \[But cannot justify the assuring of
distinctions in all cases.\] As for *repetition*, it means the doing of
an act twice over; and it is in this sense that the term is used, even
in cases where the act is repeated a hundred times; for in all cases,
the character of ‘repetition’ is one and the same. In ordinary parlance
also ‘repetition’ means only duplicating the act. So that whether an act
is *repeated* twice, or a hundred times, the expiation due to
‘repetition’ shall be one and the same, as what is forbidden is a
despicable deed; and whether a man sleeps twice during the day, or kills
a cow more than once,—the condition that there is repetition of a
despicable act is one and the same, which should lead to the same kind
of ‘degradation.’ For these reasons what is here propounded needs to be
pondered over—is open to doubt”

*Answer*—What is there that needs pondering over? That the five acts are
sinful, leading to degradation, has been declared by all writers on
*Smṛti*; as also that some other acts are similar to those five. There
is no gainsaying these two facts; as for distinction among these, it can
be made on the basis of ‘the capacity of the agent, the nature of the
offence,’ and so forth (set forth in Verse 209 below). It can never be
that what has been declared as *similar* to a certain act should stand
on the same footing as that act itself; for instance, the cow cannot be
the same as the *gavaya*. The fact of the matter is that on certain
points the two acts differ between themselves, while On others they
resemble, and hence come to be spoken of as ‘similar.’

From all this it follows that those also who are *equal* to outcasts
become ‘outcasts,’ themselves; and in this case the expiation would be
just a little less than that in the case of actual outcasts.

In connection with the question of being deprived of rights and
privileges, some people put forward the special points that the man
becomes deprived only of the right of performing the *Śrauta* rites, and
not the *Smārta* ones.

It has been argued above that there would be no difference between doing
an act twice and doing it a hundred times over. But as a matter of fact,
there would certainly be a difference among the various degrees of
repetition. How could the offence in both cases be of the same degree?

Another argument put forward is that—‘Sleeping during the day and
cow-killing, both being forbidden acts, there would be the same degree
of ‘degradation’ involved in the repeated committing of both these
deeds. But how can the deprecation of the two acts be said to be of the
same degree;—when, as a matter of fact, we find a distinction between
the degree of sinfulness clearly set forth in the corresponding
declamatory passages? And there is multiplicity of expiation also in
cases where the prohibition is exceptionally emphatic.

The rule on this point is this:—That there is ‘degradation’ brought
about by the repeated performance of forbidden acts is not true of all
forbidden acts s for instance Verse 11.41 has declared that the killing
of 1,000 animals of one kind is equal to that of a single animal of
another; hence in several cases, even though a certain forbidden act may
be repeated several times, there is no ‘degradation’ at all.—(181)


