+++
title = "188 एतद् एव"

+++
‘*This same method is to be adopted in the case of female outcasts*,’—of
women who have become outcasts.

Even in the case of such female outcasts as have not performed the
expiation, and to whom ‘water’ has been offered, in the manner of a dead
person,—food and clothing shall be supplied. Inasmuch as the text uses
the word ‘*dāna*,’ what is meant is that she is to receive just enough
food and clothing to keep her body, and she shall not be supplied with
any articles of luxury.

‘*Drink*’— From the very propriety of the case, this stands for *water*.
But, even if it was not supplied, she could get it in any quantities.
What is meant therefore by its mention is that the man supplying her
with it shall not do it in an affectionate manner.

Food and clothing also should be of the same inferior quality as the
drink. Says *Yājñavalkya* (1.70)—‘One should deprive the unchaste woman
of her rights, let her remain dirty, living on mere morsel of food,
despised, and sleeping on the ground.’

The conditions that render women ‘outcasts’ are the same as those in the
case of men. As for what has been said in connection with those who
procure abortions—‘in cases of abortion, the woman does not incur a
heavier guilt—etc., etc.’ what this means is only that both the man and
the woman are equally guilty, and it does not mean that in cases other
than this, the woman incurs a heavier guilt. Says Yājñavalkya
(3.298)—‘Intercourse with inferior men, abortion, and injuring the
husband are to be regarded as acts that degrade (render outcasts) women
in particular.’

‘*They shall live close to the house*’—What is meant by the phrase
‘close to the house’ is that they shall be turned out of the main
building and allowed to live in a separate hut.

Some people say that lodging close to the house is to be given to only
those who are performing the expiation, and not for others.

But this is not right. Because what is really meant is that the
supplying of food and clothing would be easier if she dwelt close by.
While during the time that she is undergoing the expiation, she would be
living on alms, or milk, or performing the *Cāndrāyaṇa* and other
penances. And the rule regarding living on alms cannot be regarded as
set aside by what is said in the present text; as the only purpose
served by the present text is to prescribe the means of subsistence.

From all this it follows that what the verse means is that food and
clothing, etc., have to be supplied also to that female outcast who,
either though incapacity or on account of some other cause, is not in a
position to perform the expiatory penance.—(188)


