+++
title = "197 व्रात्यानां याजनम्"

+++
’*Apostates*’—Those who have fallen off from the *Sāvitrī*; for such
men, (*a*) if one performs the *Vrātyastoma*—which is a rite specially
prescribed for them,—either by officiating at it as a priest or by
directing it;—(*b*) or if he performs the ‘*obsequies*’— the rites
performed in the cremation-grounds—‘*for strangers*’—*i.e*., for persons
other than their parents or preceptor;—(*c*) or if he performs
‘*malevolent rites*’—such as the *Śyenacit* sacrifice and the like;—or
(*d*) if he performs the *Ahīna*. sacrifice;—he becomes pure by
performing ‘*three Kṛcchras*.’

Others hold that what is here laid down does not refer to the
*performer* of the ‘malevolent’ or ‘Ahīna’ sacrifices, but to those who
officiate as priests at these sacrifices. It is for this reason that
this same rule applies also to those who perform sacrifices for
apostates. As regards the performer himself, since he undertakes the
performance in obedience to the Vedic injunction of the sacrifices
concerned, how could they be liable to expiation for their act, so long
as the performance has not been forbidden?

“As regards the *Ahīna* sacrifice, it is possible that it may have been
undertaken in obedience to a Vedic injunction; but how can the same be
said regarding the *Śyena* and other malevolent rites? There is no such
injunction as that ‘one should kill his enemies’; all that the Veda says
is that—‘if one desires to encompass the death of his enemy, he should,
for that purpose, perform the Śyena and such malevolent rites.’ And to
the killing of an enemy one is prompted solely by impetuous desire, and
the entertaining of such desire has been forbidden, by such texts
as—‘one should not seek to injure any living creature.’ To the
performance of the *Ahīna* sacrifices also people are prompted solely by
impetuous desire; as only such people are entitled to it as entertain an
eager desire for a definite reward;—but (there is this difference that)
in this case neither the desire for the particular reward nor the action
leading up to that reward is one that is forbidden. While in the other
case in question (that of the Malevolent Rites), both are forbidden: as
the general prohibition ‘one should not injure living creatures’ means
that ‘one shall undertake an act that leads up to the death of a living
creature’; and it is such *death* which forms the result of the *Śyena*
and other malevolent rites. As regards the *Ahīna* on the other hand,
there is no such prohibition as that—^(‘)one should not undertake an act
that leads to heaven.’”

In answer to this, some people offer the following explanation:—It
having been declared (11.33) that ‘speech is the Brāhmaṇa’s weapon,’ the
encompassing of the death of an enemy by means of malevolent rites,
becomes sanctioned by it. So that the Ahīna and the Malevolent Rite
stand upon the same footing.

Thus then an expiation would appear to be necessary only for the priest
officiating at these sacrifices (and not for the *sacrificer* himself).

“As a matter of fact all acts done with a purpose have been forbidden by
the general text—selfishness is deprecated’ (2.2).”

What this text means we have explained under that verse itself.

As a matter of fact, in connection with the *Ahīna*, there may he some
Vedic texts sanctioning the act of officiating at it. As regards the
Malevolent Rite on the other hand, there is impropriety on the part of
the *sacrificer* also; as is indicated by such texts as—‘Those who kill
by means of the Jyotiṣ, etc., etc.’; and it is for this reason that
expiations also have been prescribed in this connection.

So far as the present verse is concerned however, it can he taken as
referring to the priests officiating at the Malevolent Rite.

‘*Malevolent Rite*,’ ‘*abhicāra*’ is the name given to the encompassing
of an enemy’s death by means of the repeating of sacred texts and the
offering of oblations, prescribed in the Veda.—(197)


