+++
title = "209 अनुक्तनिष्कृतीनान् तु"

+++
For those wrongful deeds for which no expiation has been
prescribed,—*e.g*., the killing of men belonging to the mixed castes of
the reverse order, such as the *Caṇḍāla* and the like,—‘one shall fix
the expiation.’

“In the present work itself, it has been declared that—‘for killing
animals with bones, one may give something to a Brāhmaṇa’ ([Verse
141](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc202029.html));
and this should include the *Caṇḍāla* and others.”

In that verse, inasmuch as the said animals are spoken of along with
‘boneless animals,’ it follows that only very small animals are meant;
and what is there laid down cannot, apply to animals with very large
bodies (such as human beings, etc.).

“It having been declared that there are only *four castes*, and no
*fifth* one, the *Caṇḍāla* and other inversely mixed castes should all
fall under the ‘Śūdra.’”

Simply because there is no *fifth caste*, it does not follow that the
men in question must be *Śūdras*. Since everyone of these has a distinct
characteristic of his own. For instance, ‘the Śūdra is born of a Śūdra
father from a married wife of the same caste,’ while the others in
question are all born of *mixtures of castes*. Consequently the
expiation for the killing of these cannot he the same as that for the
killing of a *Śūdra*. Nor could it he met by the ‘giving away of
something to a Brāhmaṇa.’

‘*Capacity*’— of the offender to perform penances; *i.e*., it shall he
considered whether the man is capable of performing a *penance* or
making *gifts*.

‘*Nature of the offence*’—that is, for *causing injury to living
creatures*, it shall he the expiation definitely prescribed for that
offence; similarly for *eating improper food*; and so forth. Similarly
the relative heaviness or lightness of the offence should also be taken
into consideration.

“How can the *heaviness* or *lightness* of a certain offence be
determined *?* If it be held that it could be determined by the
heaviness of the expiation prescribed for it,—then, it has to be borne
in mind that what is asserted here refers to offences in connection with
which no expiations have been prescribed.”

True; but an offence would be recognised as *heavy* when the declamatory
passage in connection with it would be found to speak of grave evils
attending it; as also when it would be found to be committed
intentionally.

Further, the present text does not necessarily refer to only such
offences as have no expiations prescribed for them. In fact, in other
cases also the exact expiation shall he determined by considerations
here set forth.

“How do you get at this?”

We deduce this from the fact that *Expiation* and *Punishment* stand on
the same footing; and in connection with Punishments, the said
considerations have been held to apply to the cases in connection with
which definite punishments have been laid down, as well as those in
connection with which no punishments have been definitely prescribed.
Further, inasmuch as the texts have all along spoken of the comparative
heaviness and lightness of offences, the determining of the exact
expiation must depend upon the said considerations. For these reasons it
follows that what, is here stated applies to all cases—those in
connection with which special expiations have been prescribed, as also
those in connection with which they have not been prescribed.—(209)


