+++
title = "211 त्र्यहम् प्रातस्"

+++
Though it is the opening of the day that is called ‘*morning*,’ yet here
the term stands for the *forenoon*.

This rule regarding eating *in the morning* precludes eating at random.
It is only at midday that such random meals could be obtained unasked
from people who would offer such meals in accordance with the rule that
‘gifts to men shall be made at midday.’ If this could be laid down as to
he done in the *morning*, then the midday meal would be precluded, but
not the evening meal. Thus between the two optional meals—of the morning
and the midday—if one of them is further emphasised, the other becomes
excluded. And this would be only right, since it is a penance that is
prescribed here;—taking a single meal during the day having been
mentioned among ‘penances.’ And it is also a ‘*tapas*,’ an austerity, in
the sense that it *causes inconvenience*, ‘*tāpayati*.’ If the second
meal were to be precluded, it would be the evening meal that would be
so.

Others have held that when the text says that one should have
sacrificial food in the morning,’ what is meant is that only *a small
quantity* of food shall be taken. Because people who are in the habit of
an early breakfast have only a light meal in the morning, and when the
man hikes his meal only when the cooking has been finished, he is said
to be an ‘ordinary eater.’

‘*In the evening*’—during the next three days.

After that, for three days, he is to live upon ‘sacrificial food’; since
writers on Smṛti have declared that—‘Having oaten a little one should
retiro to rest.’ In the case of eating ‘*food got unasked*,’ also, the
food shall consist of ‘sacrificial food’ and shall be taken once only.
In one’s own house also, when food is obtained by ordering the servants
to ‘fetch food,’—it is food got *after asking* (not ‘unasked’), as
‘asking’ stands for any form of *request*, and is equally applicable to
*orders* and *requests* also. So that in one’s own house also the man
shall eat only that which his wife and others bring to him without his
asking for it,—and not anything else.—(211)


