+++
title = "221 एतद् रुद्रास्"

+++
All the gods have performed this penance, ‘*for deliverance from all
evils*.’

What this means is that this penance is to be performed, not only in
connection with the offences specified above, but in other cases also;
as it has been declared (by Gautama, 19.20)—‘The Kṛcchra, the Ātikṛcchra
and the Cāndrāyaṇa constitute the ‘*universal expiation*.’

In this connection there arises the question—“When the text speaks of
the *universal expiation*, does it mean that a single performance of
these atones for all sins? Or that they are to be repeated with each
sin?”

The answer to this is as follows:—The reasonable view would be that the
effect (in the shape of the expiation) should be repeated with the cause
(the sin); but what the assertion in question refers to are those sins
in regard to each of which no specific expiation has been prescribed, or
those whose commitment may be only suspected, and not definitely
ascertained;—now when the atonement is meant to be for such sins as are
only suspected to have been committed,—when for instance, one is
performing the *Kṛcchra* in accordance with what has been declared (in
Manu, 5.21) to the effect that ‘for the atonement of unknown sins one
should perform the *Kṛcchra* at least once a year,’—inasmuch as the
cause (the sin) would be uncertain, how could there be any repetition of
the expiation with each individual offence? For instance, when one is
turning his sides during sleep, he may kill several small creatures on
the bed, or when he is walking on the road, he may look at the face of
several women, till he reaches home;—in such cases the only right view
could be that one performance of the expiation should atone for all
these several offences. This has been explained by us under the text,
dealing with the expiation for the killing of ‘boneless creatures’
(140), where it has been shown that there is a single expiation for all
the offences collectively. When, however, the offences concerned are
grave ones,—we find distinct expiation prescribed in connection with
each. But what Gautama has prescribed can apply to only such
(unspecified) cases as have been mentioned above; and as the expiation
is a heavy one, it would not he reasonable to prescribe it except in the
case of repetitions. In the case of a number of suspected sins also, if
no other definite offence intervenes, it would be only right to regard
the single performance of the expiation as atoning for the whole lot of
them. The following passage also shows that a single performance should
do for a number of offences—‘Whatever sin I may have committed during
the night and during the day, what I may have done while I was awake and
while I was sleeping, etc., etc.,’—when the repetition of the term
‘*what*’ has been taken to mean that all the sins are atoned for
collectively.—(221)


