+++
title = "222 महाव्याहृतिभिर् होमः"

+++
What is here prescribed is to be done in connection with all offences.

In the case of all Homa-offerings, clarified butter is the material to
be offered, whenever any other special substance is not prescribed.

‘*Himself*.’—This precludes the alternative of having it performed by
others.

Now we proceed to consider the question whether or not this offering is
to be made in the *ordinary* fire, in the case of one who has not set up
his own ritualistic fire. But first of all the question to be considered
is why the offering should be made into a *fire* at all. What the name
‘*Homo*’ etymologically indicates is only the act of *offering* ending
with the *throwing* of the material; so that into whatever receptacle
the material may be thrown, the act of ‘*Homa*’ would be duly
accomplished. Hence the Homa-offering may be made either on the ground,
or in water or in fire. But for one who has set up the ‘domestic fire’
this offering shall not be made into the *ordinary* fire; as the
offering of *Homa* in ordinary fires has been forbidden for such a man.
It might be argued that—‘the necessity of fire is deduced from actual
usage.’ But in that-case, it would be necessary to find out what the
actual usage is. The authors of *Gṛhyasūtras* have laid down the Homa as
to be offered, in connection with the performance of the *Kṛcchra*
penance,⁻ by persons who have set up the ‘domestic fire,’ and from this
it follows that in the case also of one who has. not set up the fire,
the performance of the *Kṛcchra* by way of penance cannot be done with
out the *Homa-offering*. For the man who has not set up the fire, there
are no Homa-offerings, when the said penance is performed *for* *the
purpose of bringing about prosperity* (and not by way of an
expiation);—the desired result being obtained only by the performance of
the act itself complete in its own details.

‘*Harmlessness*.’—He shall not beat even such pupils and others who may
deserve chastisement.

‘*Truthfulness*.’—Even in joke, he shall not utter an untruth.

These two virtues, already known as conducive to the welfare of men, are
here laid down as forming essential factors in the expiatory penance.

‘*Ārjava*’ is absence of harshness.—(222)


