+++
title = "231 एवं सञ्चिन्त्य"

+++
‘*Thus*’—refers to the whole. lot of injunctions and prohibitions.

‘*Results arising after death from his deeds*’—‘The result of good acts
is Heaven, and that of bad ones, hell, if expiations are not performed,
and expiations are extremely painful,’—having thought over all this,
‘*he shall perform, good deeds*.’

‘*Good*’ is that which is enjoined, as also the *determination*, or
desire, to do it Thus it is that, even though in the case of the
prohibition ‘one shall not injure living creatures,’ what is expressed
by the words is causing pain to others by the raising and letting fall
of a stick or some other weapon, yet, on the strength of teachings like
the present verse, it is taken as forbidding the *wish* to injure.

Similarly in the case of the eating of what should not be eaten. Though
‘eating’ is the name given to the act ending with the swallowing of
food, yet even the mental act of desiring to eat has been forbidden.

Similarly also in the case of having intercourse with women with whom
one should not have intercourse; though ‘intercourse’ really stands for
the actual penetration of the organ, yet the act of mere willing to do
the act has been forbidden by other texts.

“If such be the ease with the acts of *killing*, *eating* and
*intercourse*, then the expiation for the *desire* to do these should be
the same as that for the actual acts themselves.”

There is no force in this objection. So far as the killing of a Brāhmaṇa
is concerned, what has been urged is certainly true; because of the
assertion—‘even though the man have not actually killed him, etc., etc.’
In other wises, the right course to adopt would always be to accept the
direct meaning of the-words of the texts concerned. As regards
prohibitions, on the strength of the said texts, they are taken us
pertaining to the whole series of acts, beginning with the *desire* to
act and ending with the actual act itself.

“If this be so, then, inasmuch as the liability to expiations has been
made conditional upon the doing of ‘a *forbidden* act’ (11. 44), the
expiation in each case would have to be in accordance with the
prohibition (even on the mete desire to act).”

Who says that there is no expiation? All that the words imply is that in
the case of the mere *will* to act, the expiation would be lighter than
that in that of the actual act. This would be the right course to adopt
in the course of all expiations.

“Whence is this particular rule obtained?”

From the very nature of prohibitions. In fact ‘the expiations also,
consisting in vows, restraints and pious acts, have their source in
determination.’ This last passage also refers to only Injunctions and
Prohibitions. ‘Vows’ are of the nature of Injunctions and ‘Restraints’
of the nature of Prohibitions. And having their purposes have been
fulfilled in these, the words need not be applied to other conditions
and circumstances (?). In the case of all prohibitions however, the
condition is present that the act is forbidden; whence it follows’ that
an expiation is necessary. But the expiation (in the case of mere
determination or desire) need not be the same as that in the case of the
actual act.

All this we shall show under the verse ‘coveting the property of others,
etc., etc,’ (12.5)


