+++
title = "238 यद् दुस्तरम्"

+++
‘*Hard to traverse*’— that which can be traversed with difficulty;
*e.g*., some great trouble due to illness, or to attack by a powerful
enemy. All this is easily met by ascetics.

‘*Hard to attain*’— that which is got with difficulty; *e.g*., the power
to fly in the sky and so forth.

‘*Hard to reach*’—*e.g*., riding on the back of clouds and so forth.

‘*Hard to do*’—*e.g*., the granting of boons and pronouncing of curses;
the reversing of these; as for instance Saṃvarta created another set of
divine beings.

All this is accomplished by Austerity.

These three verses describe the fact that the *Kṛcchra* penances are
conducive to all kinds of prosperity and advancement

“Inasmuch as the injunction of expiations forms the subject-matter of
the present context, any praises bestowed upon *Kṛcchra* must be taken
as supplementary to that injunction; and it would not be right to take
them as actually enjoining the penance itself as leading to prosperity.
Nor is it impossible to take the present verse as a purely commendatory
declamation,—the sense being—‘the Kṛcchra penances are so very effective
that what is hard to traverse, such as the ocean and the like, become
traversed by their means, wherefore then could they not wipe off sins?”

Our answer to this is as follows:—In the *Gṛhyasūtras* and the
*Sāmavidhāna*, we find the *Kṛcchra* enjoined without reference to
expiation; so that: since such injunctions of the penance are not in the
wake of any other enjoined act, the penance can certainly be taken as
leading to prosperity and advancement. It has also been declared
that—‘Having performed these *Kṛcchra* penances, one becomes
accomplished in all Vedas, and becomes recognised by all the gods.’
(*Gautama*, 20. 24). What is meant by ‘becoming accomplished in the
Vedas’ is that the performer obtains that reward which is obtainable by
the proper study, according to prescribed rules, of the Veda. This
injunction that we have of the study of Veda, without reference to
rewards, becomes fulfilled by the study of even a single Veda; so that
when several Vedas are studied, this can only be regarded as bringing
about special *merit*. The expression ‘becomes recognised by all the
gods’ means that he obtains the results obtainable from the performance
of all the sacrifices; if is only when a man performs sacrifices that he
becomes ‘recognised by the gods,’ and not by performing *expiations*,
which partake of the nature of *gifts* (not sacrifices). Further, what
has been said in the present work in connection with the statement that
‘for the Brāhmaṇa, Austerity is knowledge’ (236),—which was suspected of
implying the omission by the Brāhmaṇa of all his duties,—is possible
only if the penance in question be regarded as conducive to prosperity
and advancement. As for expiations, they are meant to remove sins; they
are not of the nature of acts performed for the attainment of desirable
results; so that the scope of the two sets of acts being different, how
could anything said in regard to expiations be suspected of leading to
the omission of duties? If, on the other hand, the Kṛcchra penances were
conducive to prosperity and advancement, they would stand on the same
footing as other acts tending to the same end; and it would be natural
to suspect the omission of these latter. Thus we conclude that while the
next verse speaks of these penances as destructive of sins, the present
one speaks of them as conducive to prosperity and advancement; and these
two sentences stand apart from each other; and it is only light that
what is asserted by means of the ‘sentences’ should set aside what is
only indicated by the context, it is in this sense that we have the
following declaration of Dvaipāyana and other sages—‘By the force of
Austerities, powerful intellect and other excellences are acquired.’

From all this it follows that Austerities are conducive to all kinds of
desirable results. In the case of the Vedic rituals, though it has been
declared that ‘the *Darśapūrṇamāsa* sacrifices are conducive to *all
results*, the *Jyotiṣṭoma* is conducive *to all results*,’ yet, from the
very nature of persons undertaking the performance of these rites, the
term ‘all’ in this declaration is taken as standing only *for all those
results that have been declared as following from these sacrifices*, and
not actually *all* results in the literal sense of the term. But in the
case in question it is not so; what is said in the present verse has to
be taken as literally true.—(238)


