+++
title = "242 तपसैव विशुद्धस्य"

+++
Before undertaking a rite conducive to a desirable result, it is
necessary to perform an austerity; it is this fact that is referred to
here. To this end it. has been declared that—‘First of all one should
perform austerities, and thereby become pure and sanctified; he then
becomes fit for performing religious acts.’ In the case of rites, where
preliminary Initiation and such other rites are prescribed, these would
constitute the necessary ‘austerity’; also the penance that is
prescribed in connection with certain rites, is an ‘austerity,’ and in
such rites as are performed for the allaying of troubles, and obtaining
of strength, and also the domestic rites,—it is necessary to perform an
austerity, as a preliminary step. This is what the verse means.

The term ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ stands here for all those persons that are
entitled to the performance of sacrifices, and are prompted by desire
for their results.

It has also been declared elsewhere—‘Unless a man has performed
austerities, the gods do not accept his offerings, and until his
offerings are accepted, his desires are not fulfilled.’

Though as a matter of fact, it is not the gods that bestow the results
of sacrifices, yet, inasmuch as no ‘sacrifice’ can be accomplished
without its ‘deity,’ it has been declared that *the gods* ‘*advance the
man’s interests*.’

When the gods are described as ‘accepting the offerings,’ it is not
meant that they actually take hold of the materials offered; all that is
meant is that they do not refuse to be the recipients of the
offerings.—(242)


