+++
title = "001 श्रुत्वैतान् ऋषयो"

+++
Having heard the duties of the Student and the Householder as expounded
in the foregoing three Discourses, the great Sages, Marīci and others,
‘*said* to’—asked the following question of—Bhṛgu, their teacher.

“In the text we find the expression *of the Accomplished
Student*—‘*snātakasya*’; why then do you bring in the *Student*?”

Our answer to this is that the present verse is meant to be descriptive
of what has gone before; and as a matter of fact, the duties of the
Student also have been described.

‘*High-souled*’ and ‘*who sprang from the fire*’ are the epithets of
Bhṛgu;—‘He whose origination was from the fire.’

“But in discourse I, verse 34, Bhṛgu has been spoken of as the son of
Manu”.

True; but what was stated there was an imaginary commendation, while
what is said here is in accordance with the account found in the Vedas
of Bhṛgu having been born out of fire. The name ‘*Bhṛgu*’ has been thus
explained—‘What rose out first out of the fallen semen was the Sun, and
what rose as the second was Bhṛgu’. Or, what is asserted here may be
only figurative; the origin of Bhṛgu being described as ‘Fire’, on the
basis of similarity, as regards effulgence.

In any case, it is not necessary to lay stress upon either of the two
explanations as being the more reasonable of the two; because this is
not what forms the main subject-matter of the treatise.

The whole of the text, describing the question and the answer, is meant
to indicate the importance of the subject of the evils attaching to
food; the moaning being that the evils attaching to the food itself are
more serious than those attaching to the nature of its gift and
acceptance; and this on the ground that the defects attaching to the
thing itself are more intimate, and hence more serious, than those
arising from contact.

“In connection with the defects of contact, the Expiatory Rite that is
laid down is a three days’ fast; while that in connection with the thing
itself, is a single day’s fast (5. 20). How then can this latter be said
to be *more serious*?”

Our answer is as follows:—The greater seriousness here spoken of refers
to *garlic* and such things, in connection with which it is stated
that—‘by eating these intentionally the man becomes an outcast’ (5.19);
so that the expiation necessary would be that which has been prescribed
for outcasts (which is very serious).—(1)
