+++
title = "005 लशुनङ् गृञ्जनम्"

+++
The terms ‘*garlic*’ &c. are well-known among men.

The term ‘*karaka*’ is the name of a genus, sometimes regarded as the
same as the well-known thing ‘*kryāku*’ (?); mushrooms also are
‘*kavaka*’; as it is forbidden under the name of ‘*kavaka*’, while the
expiatory rite in connection with its eating has been prescribed under
the name of ‘*chatrāka*,’ in verse 19; and no other thing (except the
mushroom) is known by the name ‘*chatruka*’; nor will it be right to
regard, on the basis of verbal similarity alone (between ‘*chatrāka*’
and ‘*chatrākāra*’, umbrella-shaped), all those things as ‘*chatrāka*’
which *resemble the umbrella*, are ‘*chatrākāra*’; as in that case the
prohibition (of ‘*chatrāka*’) would apply also to the *suvarchala* and
other things (which also are *umbrella-shaped*); and this would be
contrary to all usage. Hence we conclude tha ‘*chatrāka*’ and ‘*kavaka*’
are one and the same thing. Says the author of the *Nirukta*—‘The
*chatrāka* is *kṣuṇṇa*, since it is smashed.’ From this it is clear that
the name ‘*kavaka*’ applies to those white shoots that grow out of the
earth that has been ploughed; this is also in keeping with what is going
to be said in connection with^(‘)*kavakas growing out of the earth*’
(6.14); and it has also been just pointed out that the name applies to
what is ‘smashed’ by a stroke of the foot. It is for this reason (of its
being described as *growing out of the earth*, and of its being *mashed*
by a stroke of the foot) that the prohibition (of ‘*kavaka*’) is not
applicable to those vegetable growths that shoot out of the trunks of
trees.

In medicinal treatises the *kukuṇḍa* has been described as ‘*kavaka*’;
but this explanation (of the name on a purely conventional basis) cannot
be accepted in the same manner as that in regard to the term ‘*go*’ and
the rest. Further, as a matter of fact, in ordinary *parlance* the term
‘*kavaka*’ is always applied to a *vegetable*. Hence it is on the basis
of usage that the exact signification of the term, wherever it occurs in
a medical or other scientific treatise, should be ascertained, and we
have already shown what that signification is.

Other things also, which resemble garlic and such things mentioned here,
which resemble these latter in colour and smell, have been forbidden by
Viṣṇu. In the *Smṛti* of Parāśara however the prohibition is by name,
and this for the purpose of prescribing the special Expiatory Rite of
‘*Candrāyaṇa*’ in connection with it. From this it follows that
‘*lavataka*’, ^(‘)*karnikāra*’ and such other things are forbidden.

‘*Things* *proceeding from* *impure substances*’;—those that grow of
impure things or are in contact with them.

Others have declared that it is not right to forbid those things that
grow only out of impure things, these standing on the same footing as
‘*mūlā*’ (radish) ‘*cāstuka*’ (a kind of grass) and such other things
(known to grow out of impure things);—so that the prohibition does not
apply to those grains and vegetables growing in fields specially manured
for the purpose of enriching the harvest.

This however is not right. Because from what the text says it is clear
that all these things are equally unfit to be eaten. Further, what has
been suggested might have been accepted, if it were absolutely
impossible for anything to grow without the use of impure substances.
There are some things however that grow directly out of impure
substances, while there are some that grow out of mere connection with
them; the right view to take therefore is that the prohibition applies
to the former only, and not to the latter.

As regards *meat*, even though it grows out of semen and blood (both
impure substances), yet the present prohibition does not apply to it;
because it has been dealt with in a totally different context.—(5)


