+++
title = "006 लोहितान् वृक्षनिर्यासान्"

+++
‘*Exudation from trees*’;—anything, apart from the constituent parts of
the tree itself,—such as, the root, the trunk, the branches, the leaves,
the fruits and the flowers,—which proceeds from the tree, either in the
form of some liquid flowing from the cavity in the tree, or in some
other form. The epithet ‘red’ excludes, from prohibition, such
exudations as the camphor and the like.

Those that have their origin, source, in ‘*incisions*’; those that flow
from the bark and such parts of the tree. These things, if not red, are
not forbidden.

‘*Śelu*’—the *śleṣmātaka* fruit, to be known from medical and other
treatises. It should not be taken to mean the cream of fresh milk; as it
is never known to have that meaning. It has been argued that—“it is
better to take the word as standing for *cream*, on account of its
proximity to the term, ‘curdled milk’”. But *proximity* becomes a means
of deciding in favour of one of the two possible meanings of a term,
only when the term is actually found in usage to be used in both senses;
but it can never be the authority for attributing an unheard of meaning
to a word.

‘*Of the cow*’;—this shows that that of the buffalo etc. is not
forbidden. The milk is unfit to be eaten if, by mere contact with fire,
it becomes ‘*curdled*’,—*i.e*., thickened without adhesion; the term
‘*pīyūṣa*’ is used in the sense of the milk of the newly-calved cow.

“The text is going to declare, as *until to be eaten*, the milk, along
with all its preparations, of the cow for the first ten days of its
calving; and it is only during three or four days that the milk is of
the nature described above (*i.e*., curdled by mere contact with fire)
\[so that no separate prohibition appears to be called for.\]”

True; the thing is mentioned in the present verse with a view to those
cases where the milk continues to be so ‘curdled’ even after the first
ten days.

The two words—‘*carefully*’ and ‘*avoid?*—are added only for filling up
the metre; since ‘*unfit to be eaten*’ (of verse 5) continues to be
connected with all that is mentioned in the text.—(6)


