+++
title = "007 वृथा कृसर-संयावम्"

+++
‘*Kṛsarasaṃyāran*’ is an aggregative copulative compound. Rice cooked
with Sesamum is called ‘*kṛsara*’;—‘*saṃyāva*’ is a particular article
of food, made up of butter, sugar, sesamum and such things, well-known
in cities.

Some people, on the strength of the root ‘*yu*’ (from which the term
‘*saṃyāva*’ is derived) signifying the act of *mixing*, explain the term
‘*saṃyāva*’ as standing for all those articles of food that are prepared
by-mixing together different kinds of grains,—such as the *mudga*, the
*kuṣṭhaka* and the rest.

For these persons the separate mention of ‘*kṛsara*’ would be
superfluous; as this would be included under ‘*saṃyāva*’, as just
explained.

The term ‘*needlessly cooked*’ is to be construed with all the terms. It
stands for what the householder cooks for himself, and not for the sake
of Gods, Pitṛs or guests.

This however does not appear to be right. Because the ordinary cooking
chat the Householder Hoes is not always for any such set purpose as that
of inn king offerings out of it. What happens is that the cooking having
been done, without reference to any particular purpose, and only in a
general way, the Five Sacrifices have been laid down, as to be offered
out of the food thus cooked. So that if the man eats the food without
having made the offering to the Viśvedevas out of it, he transgresses a
direct injunction; but no prohibition enters into the cuse. According to
the present text however, as just explained, such eating would
necessitate two expiatory rites,—one due to transgressing an injunction
(by not making the offering to the Viśvedevas), and another due to the
doing of a prohibited act (of cooking the Rice-sesamum needlessly). If
however such articles of food as ‘Rice-sesamum’ and the rest, are cooked
without reference to a particular God, or to a particular sacrificial
rite,—this involves a transgression of the rules pertaining to one’s
daily duties also.

As regards the text ‘one shall not cook for himself’,—this cannot be
regarded as a prohibition (; because it being absolutely necessary to Ho
the cooking, all that the sentence does is simply to make a reference to
the *act of eating* done by one who has disobeyed the rules (regarding
the daily ‘sacrifices’). For, as already pointed out above, if it were a
prohibition, there would be a twofold expiatory rite involved. Then
again, even when the cooking is done for some other purpose, it cannot
be absolutely denied that it has been done by the man ‘for himself’
also. ‘Cooking’ means the act of cooking food, and the fact of its being
done for one’s own self cannot be denied by means of the same word; as
the man is directed to live upon the same food (*i.e*., what is left
after the feeding of the guests &c). The eating of the remnant, of food,
after the guests and others have been fed, (which has been laid down for
the Householder) is not meant to be a mere ‘embellishment’ of the
Remnant (and not an act necessary for the maintenance of the man
himself). Nor has it been laid down anywhere that at the time of cooking
the Householder is to make use of any such formula of determination as
‘cook food *for me*’, which would be regarded as forbidden (by the
sentence ‘one shall not cook for himself’) In fact the cooking is said
to be ‘for himself’ only in consideration of what happens subsequently.
That is to say, if the food were cooked wjth the determination to make
an offering to the Gods, and then subsequently the man were to eat it
all himself, this would involve the wrong of being false to one’s own
resolve also. From all this it is clear that the sentence in question is
a mere reiterative reference, the sense being—‘what one cooks, he should
not use for himself until he has made the offering to the *Viśvedevas*’.

It is in view of all this that this same rule has been held to be
applicable also to the case of the man eating *uncooked* food; in
accordance with the assertion—‘the Gods of a man have the same food as
the man himselt’ (*Vālmīkīya Rāmāyaṇa*.)

Further, cooking is not to be done only by the hungry householder; in
fact, the act of cooking every day forms an integral factor of
*Householder ship* itself. So that even on the day on which the man
himself does not eat, if he omits the act of cooking, he incurs sin.

The upshot of the whole is this:—The man may cook for himself, or for
others; the words ‘shall not cook for himself’ can only mean that people
should not undertake the act, if they do not intend to make the offering
to the Viśvedevas. So that this only reiterates the obligatory character
of the offering. Similarly also the text that—‘For the removal of the
sin of the Five Slaughters, the Viśvedeva-offering shall be made in the
ordinary fire, in the Vedic sacrificial fire, in the fire in which
oblations have been already poured and the deity dismissed, in water or
on the ground, only reiterates the obligatory character of the offering
to the *Viśvedevas*. Because the said offering cannot be made into the
Vedic sacrificial fire; specially as there is no authority attaching to
a *Smṛti* text (as against a *Śruti* text) \[so that the text just
quoted cannot be taken in its literal sense\].

‘*Milk-rice and flour-cakes*’.—‘*Pāyasa*’, ‘*Milk-rice*,’ stands for
rice cooked in milk, and not for preparations of milk;—‘*Puroḍāśa* (?)’
is flour-cake.

‘*Food of the Gods*’:—what these are can only be ascertained from usage.

‘*Sacrificial viands*—the materials laid down in the *Śruti* as to be
offered into the Fire.

These are ‘unlit to be eaten only before the *Grahahomas*; as the text
is going to lay down the necessity of eating the remnants of the
offerings.

The meat of an animal that has not been ‘consecrated,’—*i.e*. which has
not been killed at a sacrifice.^(‘)Consecration’ is a peculiar form of
purification of the animal, prescribed in connection with the
‘Animal-Sacrifice.’ The mention of this indicates that one should eat
the remnant of the meat that has been offered at a sacrifice.

Though the Text has already used the qualification ‘*needlessly
prepared*’, yet the epithet ‘*unconsecrated*’ has been added with a view
to forbid the merit of the cow, the sheep and the goa (goat?) that may
have been left by the guest and other persons to whom they may have been
offered. Or, the term *unconsecrated* may be taken as refering specially
to the meat of the cow, the sheep and the goat; since it is the killing
of these animals only that has been enjoined in connection with
sacrifices; the other animals being described as already ‘*prokṣita*’,
‘washed clean’ (fit for cating).


