+++
title = "008 अनिर्दशाया गोः"

+++
If we read the opening words as ‘*anirdaśāham goḥ kṣīram*,’ then the
prohibition regarding the milk of the camel and other animals also would
be understood as limited to the ten days from calving; so that the
qualification ‘that has not passed its ten days’ being taken with every
one of the animals, it would become necessary to depend entirely upon
usage in support of the absolute prohibition of the milk of the camel
and other animals. If however we rend ‘*anirdaśāyāḥ*’ in the feminine
form, then there would be no possibility of the above misunderstanding.
Because it would not be possible to interpret the nominal affixes
(attached to filenames of the other animals) as, in any way, connecting
these animals with the epithet ‘*anirdaśāyāḥ*’)

In as much as the word ‘milk’ is repeated in the second half of the
verse, this implies that what are forbidden by the former half are the
milk of the camel, of the one-hoofed animals, of the sheep, of the goat
and of the cow within ten days of its calving,—along with all its
preparations; while in the case of the ‘irregular’ cow and the cow
‘deprived of its calf’, it is the *milk* only that is forbidden. Such is
the usage also.

That cow is called ‘*anirdaśāha*,’ ‘not passed its ten days’, in whose
case ten days have not passed since her calving.

‘*Irregular cow*’;—the cow that is expected to give milk both morning
and evening, but gives it only at one time; giving milk in the evening
only if not milked in the morning; and on account of the supply of milk
being scanty, she is milked once only.

Some people explain ‘*Sandhini*’ as standing for that cow which, on
having lost her own calf, is made to yield milk by bringing to her the
calf of another cow; and in this case the cow ‘*without her calf*’ would
be one whose calf is alive, but is separated from it, and is milked,
independently of the calf, through presenting before her such special
articles of food as the husks of barley, rice etc., so that the cow
would be called ‘without her calf’ by the calf being held aside; just as
people say—‘bring the cow without her calf’.

The ‘cow’ having been already mentioned in the first half, the term is
repeated in the second half, with a view to show that similar milk of
the goat and the buffalo is not forbidden. The same does not hold good
regarding the epithet ‘*anirdaśāyāh*,’ ‘that has not passed its ten
days;’ so that in this connection the ‘cow’ includes the front and the
buffalo also. So says Gautama (17.22-23)—‘The milk of the cow that has
not passed its ten days, during the period of impurity; also of the goat
and the buffalo.’

The term ‘*payaḥ*’ ‘milk,’ has been added because it is not easy to
construe the term ‘of the cow,’ with the term ‘*kṣīram*,’ ‘milk’ as
contained in the compound ‘*sandhinīkṣīram*.’—(8)


