+++
title = "009 आरण्यानाञ् च"

+++
‘*Wild animals*’—cows, elephants, monkeys and so forth.

There can be no milk of males; hence the masculine gender used in
connection with the words ‘*sarvī(?)ṣām mṛgāṇam*’ is to be taken as
standing for the genus, and the connection is with the female members of
that genus: the term ‘*mṛgakṣīram*’ thus being similar
to^(‘)*kukkuṭāṇḍam*’. This has been made clear by the author of the
*Mahābhāṣyu* in connection with the rules relating to the change of the
feminine form into the masculine, (when occurring within a compound).

‘*Māhiṣam vinā*’;—the neuter form has been used, in view of the neuter
form ‘*payaḥ*’^(‘)milk’.

‘*Females*,’—hum in females, women. Though in such passages as^(‘)*strī
gauḥ somakrayiṇī*’,^(‘)the female cow is the price of the *soma*’,—the
term ‘*strī*’, ‘female’, is found to be used in connection with the
*animal with the dew(?)lap* also,—yet it is to be understood here in the
sense of the^(‘)woman’, in as much as in the present context the term
cannot apply to any other species of animals, and as it is better known
as standing for the^(‘)human female’ only. In all such assertions
as—‘females desire sweets’, ‘females are the best jewels’—the word is
understood as standing for the *woman*.

The term^(‘)*eva*’ in the text has been explained as indicating the
prohibition of applying the woman’s milk to the eye and such other uses
of it: the it caning being that the milk of the woman is to be avoided,
not only in eating, but also in all similar uses. The word can be taken
as indicative of all this only on the strength of usage and other
*Smṛti* texts; and it cannot be regarded as directly expressive of
it.—(9).


