+++
title = "010 दधि भक्ष्यम्"

+++
All ‘soured substances’ having been forbidden in the foregoing verse,
the present: text makes an exception in favour of a few of them.

‘*Śukta*’, ‘soured substance’, is the name of those substances which,
being juicy in their constitution and having a distinct taste of their
own, become *soured* either by the flux of time, or by the contact of
some other substance. For instance, the *Āmrātaka*, which is sweet and
full of juice, becomes^(‘)soured’ after the lapse of some time;
cane-juice becomes ‘soured’ after sometime. Things that are sour by
their very nature—*e*. *g*., the Pomegranate, the Āmalaka, the Lemon
&c.—are not called^(‘)soured substances’; nor those that are still
*unripe*. Because the term^(‘)*śukta*’,^(‘)soured’, is not synonymous
with^(‘)sour’. What are directly forbidden here are only those soured
substances that have become sour by fermentation; and those that turn
sour by the contact of flowers and roots &c. are only indirectly
indicated; according to what Gautama has said (17.14)—^(‘)All soured
substances except Curd only’.

^(‘)*Distilled*’.—Distillation consists in allowing the thing to remain
soaked in water over-night.

“In that case the sourness would be due to the length of time (so that
all these would be included among^(‘)Soured Substances’).”

True; these also are ‘soured substances’; and the Instrumental ending
may signify either *instrumentality* or *association*. The meaning thus
is—‘what are *distilled*—*e.g*. made out of—flowers etc. along with
water’.

Some people offer the fallowing explanation:—“The roots of trees are
directly productive of *sourness*. Such ‘sour substances’ as the
Pomegranate, the *Āmalaka* and the rest are ‘fit to be eaten’, while
those that are distilled from grapes and other sweet things are not
eaten. ‘Distillation’ means *producing acidity*; hence ‘*distilled from
flowers*’ means soured by flowers and such things. Grapes and such other
things however are not themselves productive of acidity; in their case
it is *time* alone that is the acidulating agent.”

This however i not right; simply because such is not the meaning of the
term (‘distillation’). When one says ‘he is *distilling* Soma’—this is
not understood to mean that he is *making it sour*; what is understood
is as we have explained above.

‘*Prepared out of curd*’;—*e.g. Udaśvit*, *Maṣṭu* (whey), *Kilāṭa*
(Coagulated milk), *Kūrcika* (Inspissated milk) and so forth.—(10)


