+++
title = "011 क्रव्यादाञ् शकुनान्"

+++
‘*Carnivorous*’;—those that eat raw flesh; such as the Heron, the
Vulture &c. What are meant are those that eat *raw flesh* only; and not
those that eat both (raw and cooked flesh), such as the Peacock and the
rest.

‘*Living in villages*’—even though they be not carnivorous.

‘*One-hoofed animals*;’—*e.g*., the Horse, the Mule, the Ass and so
forth.

‘*Not specified*’;—*i.e*. those that have not been specified as *fit to
be eaten* should not be eaten: those that have been so specified are lit
to be eaten. For instance, it has been declared that ‘one who desires to
obtain offspring shall eat the meat of the camel, the horse, the bear
and the white ass’. \[and here the one-hoofed animals, horse and white
ass, are specified as fit to be eaten\].

“The eatability of these animals is known only from this *Śruti*
passage. And the presence of the term ‘specified’ in the verse would he
understood to mean that the animals thus specified in the Vedic passage
may be eaten even elsewhere (apart from Vedic sacrifices also); the
meaning of the text being ‘one shall avoid those *nut specified*, but
not *those specified*.’ As a matter of fact however, nowhere in the
*Smṛti* have any one-hoofed animals been *specified* as fit to be eaten,
with reference to which the term ‘not specified’ (of the text) could be
explained. Hence it comes to this that ‘those not specified *in the
śruti* are unfit to be eaten”.’

Our answer to the above is that such a sense of the Smṛti would be
contrary to all usage. The term ‘not specified’ is a mere re-iterative
reference.

‘*Ṭiṭṭibha*’—is a bird which is always screaming ‘ṭiṭ’, ‘ṭiṭ’. In most
cases the names of birds are in imitation of their sounds: as says the
*Nirukta*—‘The name *Kāka* is in imitation of the sound; such is the
case with most bird-names.’—(11).


