+++
title = "012 कलविङ्कम् प्लवम्"

+++
‘*Sparrow*’, ‘*Kalabiṅka*’ (‘*Kalaviṅka*’), is the name of a
village-bird described in the scriptures. Its prohibition being already
got at by the general prohibition of all ‘village-birds’, the separate
mention of the sparrow implies the catability of the *female*
sparrow;—the term ‘*kalabiṅka*’ being a masculine just like the term
‘bull.’

Others have explained that this name has been added for the purpose of
excluding (from the prohibition) the *wild* sparrow, which retires to
the forest during the rains. They are called ‘village-birds’ because of
their living in the villages during the greater part of the year; just
as is the case with the ‘wild buffalo.’

The prohibition of the *plava*, the *haṃsa*, and the *cakravāka* being
already got at from the general prohibition of all ‘web-footed birds’,
the separate mention of these is for the purpose of emphasising the
obligatory character of their exclusion.—the eating of the ‘*Ātya*’ and
other ‘web-footed’ birds being regarded as *optional*.

‘*Village-cock*’—the specification of the ‘*village* -cock’ permits the
eating of the wild cock.

“But why should there have been any suspicion regarding the
non-eatability of the *wild* cock at all?”

Because another *Smṛti* text says simply—‘Among birds, *the cock*’,
which indicates that all kinds of cock are equally ‘unfit to be eaten’;
it is for this reason that this general statement line been sought by
the present text, to be limited in its scope.

“But why cannot this he regarded as a case of option, since the present
text permits the eating of the wild crick, which the other text
forbids?”

This cannot he a case of option: it is a case of option only when there
are two contradictory texts of equal authority hearing upon the same
subject; in the present case however, there is no contradiction: there
is no difference in the actual teaching of the two *Smṛti-texts*
concerned: because it is quite reasonable to regard the general
statement as restricted in its scope; specially as a third independent
text has already been quoted above.

“If this be so, then the general prohibition regarding the web-footed
birds may be taken as restricted in its scope to the *Haṃsa* and other
specified birds: so that the prohibition does not extend to all crows
and web-footed birds.”

This would have been the case if the Smṛti-treatises were not the work
of a human author. In the case of works of non-human origin, if they
proceed from different sources, there would be no useful purpose by
making the general statement restricted to the particular case of the
*Haṃsa* and other birds; while in the case of the work of human authors,
if they proceed from different persons, it is quite possible that the
person who knows the truth in its general form is ignorant of it in the
restricted form, or the person who know it in the limited form is
ignorant of it in the wider form; so that when we come to consider the
source of the two statements, we assume the existence (in the Veda) of a
general statement as the source of one, and a particular statement as
the source of the other: and these two Vedic statements occurring in two
different recensional texts, the only reasonable course is to construe
them together, unless there are distinct injunctions bearing upon the
two statements. Specially as no such complaint can be raised against the
Vedas as—‘What is the use of the *general* statement if it is to be
taken in its restricted sense?’ There is no room for such a complaint,
because there is no author in the case against whom such a complaint
could be raised. Specially as in the case of a Vedic statement, the only
idea that is obtained is front the actual words of the text, only that
which can be derived from the words themselves; and there can be no
justification for the assuming of any other meaning, for any purpose
whatsoever.

What the ‘*Rajjudāla*’ and other birds are is to be learnt from persons
versed in the science of birds.—(12)


