+++
title = "013 प्रतुदाञ् जालपादांश्"

+++
Those that feed by ‘striking’—piercing—^(‘)with their beaks.’ Such is
the nature of these birds. The *Śatapatra* and other birds belong to
this class.

‘Web-footed’—The *Āti* and the rest. That there is an option in regard
to this has already been pointed out above (*Bhāṣya* on 12.)

“Wherever there is an *option*, it depends upon the man’s wish which of
the two options he will adopt: and as a matter of fact, it is only an
unforbidden course that can be so adopted. The act of *eating* is an
ordinary temporal act, possible only when there is a desire on the part
of the man (to do it); it is not a spiritual act, which would have to be
done in any case. So that we do not see any useful purpose that could be
secured by an optional prohibition.”

Our answer to this is that this has already been answered.

“But what has been said may be all right in regard to cases where (as in
the Veda) the comprehension of the meaning depends entirely upon the
words of the text, and there is no intention (of any author) behind them
(to indicate their true purport). The present treatise however is the
work of a human author, having been composed by him with great care and
labour. for the purpose of supplying in brief all the information that
was contained in another voluminous work containing a hundred thousand
verses; so that no needless word can be used in it. In fact it is for
this reason (of his not using a single superfluous word) that the author
comes to be regarded as a ‘Teacher’. It is not that there is no
prohibition of *all web-footed birds* in general, in which case alone
the prohibition of a particular web-footed bird, the *Haṃsa*, could be
justified. Since the present verse also is a Smṛti-text (and it forbids
all web-footed birds in general). Some people have held that the term
‘*jālapāda*’ (web-footed bird) in the present verse is a wrong reading”.

We have already explained that the intention of the Teacher is undersood
with the help of gestures, actions and the spinning out of long
explanations; and in the present case particular details are also
inferred. What was meant to be said was that ‘one shall not eat
web-footed birds in normal times’; but the author has propounded the
prohibition in the wider form, with it view to justifying both
prohibitions (of *web-footed* birds in general, and of the *Haṃsa* in
particular).

‘*Sūnā*’ ‘Slaughter house’, is that place where animals are killed for
the purpose of selling their flesh. Others explain it as ‘meat-market’.

‘*Dried meat*’, ‘*Vallura*’, is Mesh dried and kept for several days.

‘*Nakhuviṣkira*’ are those birds that scratch with their nails;—*e.g*.
the Peacock, the Cock &c.

These birds are partly ‘fit to be eaten’ also, in view of the assertion
that these may be eaten ‘in abnormal times;’ specially in view of what
another Smṛti-writer has said regarding ‘the Cock among birds’ (being
eatable). But the present text of Manu cannot be regarded as referring
to the Cock; as in that case the separate mention of the ‘Cock’ would be
useless.—(13)


