+++
title = "023 बभूवुर् हि"

+++
The killing of beasts and birds has been prescribed in connection with
the sacrifice named ‘*Ṣaḍviṃśat-saṃvatsara*’ (Twenty-six Years). This is
what is referred to in the present verse. The Brāhmaṇa-passage bearing
upon the subject is as follows:—‘At the end of the day the master of the
house goes out hunting, and out of the flesh of the animals that he
kills sacrificial cakes are made’.

In as much as the present verse is purely commendatory, no significance
is meant to be attached to the past tense in the term ‘*babhūva*’,
‘*were made*’; hence the same thing is done now-a-days also.

The same holds good regarding the term ‘*purāṇeṣu*’, ‘*in ancient
times*’. This also means that people should not consider that the said
sacrificial practice has come into force in recent times only.—Or, the
term may be taken to mean that ‘it should not be understood that there
is nothing to sanction the practice of killing animals at
sacrifices’.—Or, the term may be regarded as added for the benefit of
those persons who are incapable of comprehending the meaning of the
scriptures themselves, and who regulate their conduct entirely in
accordance with the practices of other people, on the principle that
‘the right path is that whereby great men have gone’. The meaning is
that ‘this practice is not of recent origin, it is without beginning’.

The ‘ancient sages’ are certain Brāhmaṇas, well-known for their
austerities. Or, it may stand for a distinct species of beings; as
described in the Mahābhārata and other works. In this connection it is
not necessary to press the objection that—“If these sages belong to a
distinct species of beings, they are like *Gandhar* *vas* and others,
and as such, not entitled to the performance of sacrifices.”;—since the
passage is a purely commendatory one, and as such, may be understood in
any way one chooses.

‘*Brahmakṣatriyasava*’,—*sacrifices* performed by Brāhmaṇas and
Kṣatriyas.—(23)


