+++
title = "024 यत् किम्"

+++
‘*Whatever food is mixed with oils*.’—‘*Food*’ stands for Rice etc.
Though the roots to ‘eat’ and to ‘feed’ are synonymous, yet the two
terms ‘food’ and ‘eatables’ have been used with a view to the various
articles of food.

‘*Unspoilt*’—here stands for what has not become sour by keeping.

Such food ‘*may b* *e* *eaten*, *though stale*’. That is called ‘stale’
which has been kept over night. What is cooked on one day also becomes
‘stale’ the next day.

‘*Mixed with oils*.’—In regard to this the following question is
raised:—

“Does this mean that whatever in the shape of vegetable-juice etc. has
been cooked with oils should be eaten even when stale?—Or, that oils are
to be mixed up with dry articles of food, at the time that they are
going to be eaten stale? According to the latter view stale cakes and
sweets also would have to be eaten only after having been *mixed with
oils*.”

There is, it is argued, no room for any such doubt; since what is
asserted by the words ‘may be eaten though stale’ is only the eatability
of food mixed with oils; so that the epithet ‘mixed with oils’ is part
of the Subject, and not of the Predicate. Nor do we find it referred to
by the pronoun ‘*tat*’, ‘that’, by any such form of expression as ‘what
is stale, *that* may be eaten mixed with oils’ (which would make the
epithet part of the Predicate).

The answer to this is that there is still some ground for doubt; as
(according to the explanation just suggested) there would be no point in
the separate mention of the ‘remnants of sacrificial offering’, which
are stale and *not mixed* *with* *oils* (the latter being implied by
their being mentioned apart from ‘food mixed with oils;’ because there
is no chance of these remnants being ‘mixed with oils’ and becoming
‘stale’. Consequently the separate mention of these can have some sense
only if in their case it were not considered necessary to mix oils at
the time of eating. So that the separate mention of these becomes
justified only if, in the case of these Remnants, it be not necessary to
mix oils at the time of eating (*which is considered necessary in the*
*case* *of the other articles of food*.)

But, even so, there need not be any doubt. For in that case, it would be
only right to take the epithet ‘mixed with oils’ as part of the
Predicate, for the purpose of justifying the separate mention of the
‘Remnants of sacrificial offerings’. \[So that thus also, the meaning
would be quite clear, though different from what we had explained
before.\]

In answer to this it is argued that there is only this ground for doubt
that in view of the fact that the direct construction of the words as
they stand is always to be preferred to any other roundabout
constructions,—would it be right to regard the mention of the
‘sacrificial remnants’ as merely reiterative (and not injunctive) \[ in
which case it may well be left pointless\]? Or that, inorder to guard
against the mention being pointless, the words should be construed to
mean that whatever is stale should be mixed with oils at the time of
eating?

On this point there is no doubt; rather than allow the words of the text
to be regarded us pointless, it is far more reasonable to have recourse
to the indirect method of construction. The real decision however
depends entirely upon usage.

‘*Oils*.’—This term stands for butter, oil, fat and bone-marrow—(24).


