+++
title = "026 एतद् उक्तम्"

+++
The first half of the verse cuts off the preceding section; and what is
implied by this cutting off of the section is that the section that has
gone before pertains to the twice-born castes only, not to *Śūdras*,
while what follows applies to *Śūdras* also. It is for this reason that
several methods of eating meat shall be described, and the reward
resulting from the giving up of meat-eating shall accrue to the *Śūdra*
also. If this were not so, then, in the matter of eating meat also, the
*Śūdra* would be free to do what he likes; just as he is in regard to
the eating of garlic and other things that has been forbidden for
‘twice-born persons’ only, in verses 5 *ete. etc*. above.

“If it is as you say, then there is the following difficulty:—In verse
32 below, the Text is going to declare the eatability of the meat left
from the worship of the Gods:—*viz*. ‘One does not become contaminated
by sin if he eats meat after having worshipped the Gods and the
Pitṛs’;—now the ‘worship of the gods’ etc. can be done only with such
meaf as is sacred; and those beasts and birds that have been forbidden
for twice-born people (in the next section) are not sacred; hence, the
worshipping of Gods etc. with the meat of these beasts and birds being
impossible,—and what does not form the ‘remnant of worship’ being unfit
to be eaten,—these other beasts and birds also, mentioned in a different
context, become forbidden for the twice-born people; and the prohibition
of these could be made to apply to the *Śūdra* also by some such other
method (of reasoning). So that there is no point in the dividing of the
sections (simply for making the prohibitions of the next section
applicable to *Śūdras* also). And as for the prohibition of garlic and
such things (that have been forbidden specially for twice-born persons),
it is not applicable to *Śūdras* at all.”

There is this useful purpose served by the dividing of the two sections,
that the prohibition of garlic and other things ceases to be applicable
to the *Śūdra*. As regards meat also, in as much as the *Householder*
only is entitled to do the worshipping of Gods, it is a matter purely
optional for such *Śūdras* as are not ‘householders’.

“As a matter of fact, *Śūdras* also are entitled to the performance of
sacrifices with cooked food; the eating of food has also been prescribed
for Householders; but no ‘sacrifices with cooked food’ are ever offered
with garlic and such other things. So that these things may be eaten, or
not, by *Śūdras*, entirely according to their option.—‘Why’? What would
be the harm? In that case the mention of ‘twiceborn persons’ (in
connection with the forbidding of garlic, etc.) would have no point at
all.’

This has been already answered by the explanation that one who is not a
Householder, or who is travelling away from home, may do what he likes.
Nor is it necessary that the Householder shall not eat what has not been
offered in oblations; the meaning of the declaration ‘one shall live on
remnants’ being that ‘he shall not eat until he has made the offering to
the Vishedevas.’ Now, that substance alone is ‘sacred’, and can be
offered as oblation, which has been prescribed as to be offered at, and
thus helping the fulfilment of, a sacrifice. Some people fetch food from
somewhere, at the time of eating, and eat it in their own house; and in
this case even though the food may not be the ‘remnant of a sacrifice’,
it would not be forbidden. As regards *meat* however, we have the
restriction directly imposed, that ‘it shall never be eaten unless it
has been offered to the Gods.’

“If this is applicable to all the four castes, then there is no point in
what is going to be said (under 5.57) in connection with purifications.”

The use of that we shall explain at that place.

“In view of the mention of *twice-born people* in the foregoing section,
it follows that *day’s meat* and such things also are fit to be eaten by
*Śūdras*.”

Under Discourse XI we shall show that there are indications to the
effect that ‘the village-pig’, the ass, the camel, and other animals
mentioned in the three verses (157 etc.) are ‘unfit to be eaten’ for the
*Śūdra* also.—(26).


