+++
title = "027 प्रोक्षितम् भक्षयेन्"

+++
The remnant of the meat of the animal sacrificed at the *Agniṣṭoma* is
figuratively called ‘consecrated’.

“The term ‘*prokṣita*’ literally means *sprinkled with water*, being
derived from the root ‘*ukṣa*,’ ‘to sprinkle’; and it is in this sense
that the word has been used in all such expressions as ‘bring the
*prokṣaṇī* water-vessels,’ ‘butter is th e *prokṣaṇa*, the
sprinkling-material,’ ‘*prokṣaṇībhiḥ udvejitāḥ*,’ ‘bothered by
sprinkings (sprinklings?),’ and so forth. Thus then, if the word
literally means ‘what is done by sprinkling,’ then why should such terms
us are expressive of certain consecrations prescribed in the Veda, (such
as *sprinkling with water* and the like), be taken as indirectly
indicating the animal (sacrificed) and its meat? Why should the direct
signification of the word be abandoned in favour of an indirect
indication? For these reasons it is better to take the text to mean
‘meat *sprinkled with water and such liquids*’.”

What is urged would be quite true, if there were no other texts and
commendatory passages bearing upon the matter; such as we have in the
shape of such texts as ‘Unconsecrated meat etc.’ (Verse), ‘Animnls not
consecrated with sacred texts etc.’ (36). A careful examination of all
these texts leads to the conclusion that the meaning of the word is as
we have explained it.

“If so, then what is said here being already mentioned in the texts
quoted, what would be the use of the present text?”

Some people say that the present verse is purely re-iterative. It cannot
be an injunction of eating meat when one wishes to do so. Because the
man who is hungry and wishes to cat meat can take to it through his
desire to relieve his hunger (and he does not need an injunction for
that). That is called an ‘Injunction’ which points to such activity of
the agent as would not be possible under the influence of any ordinary
visible motive; such injunctions, for instance, as ‘one shall perform
the *Agnihotra* through out his life;’ and on such a matter, the
scripture is the sole source of knowledge (and authority) available. We
need not seek for scriptural authority in the case of the acts in
connection with which we have the positive and negative notions to the
affect that—‘if it is done, such and such a reward shall follow—,and if
it is not done, such and such an evil shall befall us.’ And it is only
when there is no such source of knowledge available, and the matter is
knowable by means of scriptures alone, that it becomes a case of
‘Injunction.’ As regards the case in question, even infants at the
breast know, without being told, that eating brings strength and removes
pain. \[So that the present text cannot be regarded as an Injunction\].
Nor again can it be taken as a Restrictive Injunction, for the simple
reason that no such sense of restriction is recognised (as conveyed by
the words), (*a*) For instance, if the *restriction* were in the form
‘one must eat what has been consecrated,’—then, since no time is
specified the due observance of this injunction would disturb the entire
routine of food and rest, and the man may have to be eating constantly;
so that an impossible act will have been enjoined in this case. It has
been said that—‘one who eats not at Śrāddhas etc.’,—and again ‘the day
on which he is remiss etc.’ Then again, the author of the *Mahābhāṣya*
has declared that a Restriction is always supplementary to an
Injunction; so that when there is no Injunction, how can there be any
Restriction? What has been ‘consecrated’ by one man cannot be obtained
by another man; so that every man will have to eat all the meat that he
consecrates, and this would entail a great calamity, (*b*) If. on the
other hand, the restriction be taken to be in the form of
preclusion—‘one shall eat *only what is consecrated*, and not what is
not consecrated,’—on the ground of its fulfilling the condition of
‘Preclusion’, that hunger cannot be alleviated except by the eating of
both consecrated and unconsecrated food, either simultaneously or one
after the other;—even so this would be already implied by what has been
said above regarding ‘consecrated meat’ (in verse 7). (So that in this
case also there would be no point in taking the present text as an
Injunction.)

Others however find the following fault in the above view:—if all
unconsecrated meat were forbidden, birds would fall in the category of
‘forbidden food’; specially us there is no authority for any such
restricted view that those alone are forbidden in their unconsecrated
form, in connection with which consecration has been enjoined (and no
consecration has been enjoined regarding birds).

Some people regard this view as improper. Because even so, the text
cannot but be regarded as implying (if not directly asserting) the
prohibition of (unconsecrated) birds also.

For these reasons, in as much as every Restriction is subservient to
some enjoined act, it appears better to regard the present text as
purely re-iterative of the eatability of consecrated meat. Just as at
sacrifices, one must eat the consecrated meat, and omitting to eat it
involves disobedience of the scriptural Injunction, so would it be in
connection with all other occasions (on which meat is consecrated). And
when the text is purely reiterative, it may also imply a preclusion (as
shown above). The rule that ‘one shall not eat the unconsecrated meat of
the cow, the sheep and the goat’ would only be a reiteration of the
uneatability of ‘unconsecrated meat’ (mentioned in verse 7);—this
reiteration in the present verse serving the purpose of permitting the
eating of *unconsecrated* meat also, ‘at the wish of Brāhmaṇas’, and
under certain other circumstances (specified in the present verse).

Others again have taken the following view.—Under 4.213 we have the
mention of ‘needlessly prepared meat,’ and the present verse serves the
purpose of explaining what the ‘needlessly prepared meat’ is; as in the
absence of this it could not be known what is ‘needlessly prepared
meat’.

Or, it may be that in one verse we have the rule for the enter (who does
the consecration himself), while what the other means is that other
persons, guests and others, shall not eat the meat belonging to (and
offered by) a person who has not performed the worship of the Gods, etc.
(and consecrated the meat at it). In the event of the householder being
somehow not entitled to worship the Gods, his guests and other persons
would be justified in doing that worship for him; and if the meat has
been consecrated at such a worship, then they may eat it. The second
prohibition (of unconsecrated meat)—‘one incurs no sin by eating meat
after having worshipped the Gods and the Pitṛs’ (Verse 32)—is meant for
those persons who are capable of performing the worship at their own
house and have not performed it. What is stated in verse 36—‘animals not
consecrated by sacred texts etc.’—is meant to be explanatory of what is
meant by the term ‘consecration.’

Thus we have shown that all the five prohibitive passages have five
distinct meanings and serve distinctly useful purposes.

‘*At the wish of the Brāhmaṇas*’—‘*Brāhmaṇañca kāmyayā*’—‘*kāmyā*’ is
*kāmanā, ‘wish*’; the form ‘*kāmyā*’ being a Vedic anachronism.

“If this text permits the eating of unconscrated meat at the wish of the
*Brāhmaṇas*, then what is the sense of this restriction? Does it mean
that if one omits to eat at their wish, he incurs the sin of disobeying
the scriptures? Or, does the present section set forth only a
counter-exception? If it is a mere counter-exception, then such
counter-exception, setting aside the force of the prohibition, would be
available also in the shape of such assertions as ‘meat may be eaten at
marriages’.”

The text does not mean that one *must* eat meat under the circumstances;
all that is meant is that if the Brāhmaṇas are very superior persons,
then the disobeying of their wish would not be right.

Others again construe the term ‘of Brāhmaṇas’ with verse 32 also, and
take the present text as an Injunction for the eating of meat of the
hare and other animals also; the sense being that—‘at sacrifices and
marriages, or at other large dinner-parties, if the Brāhmaṇas request
one to eat meat, then the meat of such animals should not be regarded as
forbidden, as they ane, by their very nature, consecrated to the Gods’;
and it is only under special circumstances that consecration and worship
of the Gods etc. may be performed. In fact it is only those kinds of
meat that have been forbidden under certain circumstances whose eating
is sanctioned, at the wish of Brāhmaṇas; and the sanction does not apply
to the eating of ‘carnivorous birds’ and the rest, or to the case of a
man who has resolved to give up meat in view of ‘ceasing to eat meat
being conducive to highest results,’—irrespective of the fact of the
meat being either ‘consecrated’ or ‘unconsecrated,’ or ‘offered’ or ‘not
offered.’

All that is meant by the present text is that the man who is entitled to
receive the *Madhuparka* offering shall eat the unconsecrated meat that
may be offered to him; and it does not contain an Injunction of offering
the *Madhuparka*. The person meant here as the recipient of the
*Madhuparka* is the Guest, and not the king and other honoured persons;
just as we find it laid down for the Householder that ‘the guest shall
not dwell in his house without eating.’ From this it would follow that
nothing shall be offered to the guest against his desire. As for the
notion that one may do what he likes in the matter of receiving an
honoured guest and in feeding him,—if this idea were acted up to, then
those acts would not have been done ‘for the sake of the guest.’

“But the position of the *guest*. also is uncertain.”

True; but it has been found that the performance of the act brings
spiritual merit by producing pleasure in the recipient’s mind. Hence it
is that by way of a rule it has been laid down for the giver, in
accordance with the practice by which the calf is offered, that ‘there
can be no *Madhuparka* without meat.’

“What is herein laid down may be regarded as pertaining to the case of
priests officiating at one’s sacrifice.”

In that case, this also, like the preceding clause, may be only
reiterative of what pertains to the officiating priest and to
*Śrāddhas*.

“But in connection with the work of the priests, the eating of the *Iḍū*
and such other materials has been prescribed; and the restrictions
bearing upon that pertains to the *Sacrifice*, and not to the priests.”

True; but if the priests do not eat, they are censured, and also become
beset with transcendental evil. Even if they eat, they do not become
related to the result following from the act. Servants employed on wages
(such as the priests are) perform the details prescribed in the
scriptures; and it has been prescribed that ‘the priests along with the
sacrificer as the fifth eat the *Iḍā* cake,;’ so that it is incumbent
upon those who have accepted the priestly office to do that eating. And
in that case it is only right that this eating should be reiterated.
There is however nothing^(‘)scriptual’ in the eating done by persons
eating at *Śrāddhas* or by the priests. So that the reiteration is of
the eating done by the sacrifices—It may be asked—“For what purpose is
this reiteration?”—But reiteration does not always need a purpose. All
that is done is that it reiterates what has been enjoined elsewhere.
Similarly in the case in question also, if the owner of the cow has
promised to honour the guest with the killing of the cow, then the guest
must eat it; for he accepts the offering of *Madhuparka* as a favour to
the offerer; so that it is necessary that he should accomplish the act
preceding the offering. Otherwise, in the event of the *Madhuparka* not
being accepted, the said favour would not be bestowed; consequently in
the matter of the eating of forbidden meat, it is necessary for the man
at the very outset to accept the *Madhuparka* and the duties of the
priest:—similarly in the matter of feeding the Brāhmaṇas. As regards the
Student, since certain strict observances have been prescribed for him,
meat should be regarded as altogether ‘unfit to be eaten.’

^(‘)*When his life in in danger*’.—From the context it follows that what
is meant is that—‘in the event of his not eating meat without
worshipping the gods, and no other food being available, if there be a
fear of his losing his life, either though disease of through hunger,
one may eat the cow, the sheep and the goat.’ This rule is based upon
the Vedic declaration that ‘one shall protect himself from everything.’
So that under the circumstances, if one omits to eat meat, he becomes
his own murderer; and suicide has been forbidden by such text as—(*a*)
‘One shall protect himself from everything’; (*b*) ‘Hence the man,
expecting to live to the fullest extent of human life, shall never kill
himself with a desire to proceed to heaven; as such an act would make
him unfit for heaven’;—all which shows that by eating even forbidden
meat to save his life, one does not incur sin. Says the Mantra also
(Iśopaniṣad 3)—‘Those who kill themselves go, after death, to those
regions that are covered by blind darkness and are fit only for demons.”

When there is danger to life, even the Student may eat meat; and for him
his young age would necessitate the performance of the expiatory rite as
prescribed in the text—‘If the Student ever eats meat and honey, etc.’
(1?.158). Vyāsa has declared that when there is *tear* of losing one’s
life through hanger, one may eat even forbidden meat; and by the
instance of the ‘dog’s thigh’ (eaten by Viśvāmitra) it is indicated that
such meat may be eaten, but once only.

From this it follows that in the case of serious developments of
diseases, where one cannot be sure that the man will certainly recover
by eating meat, one shall not eat forbidden meat, such as that of the
village-cock and the like; though it is permitted to eat such meat as
has been consecrated or offered to the gods.

In the case of disease also one shall not eat meat for the purpose of
recovering from a disease that may have just set in; but in the case of
men who have become enfeebled and emaciated through disease, the eating
of meat is always permitted: as asserted in the verse—‘Persons daily
addicted to wine and women, consumptives, those emaciated through
fatigue and disease, as also enfeebled patients, live upon the juices of
meat.’ It is necessary for these persons to worship the gods in the case
of the meat of unconsecrated goat: there would however be no harm, if on
some day this be not found possible.—(27).


