+++
title = "032 क्रीत्वा स्वयम्"

+++
The law here laid down refers to the meat of deer and birds. The meaning
is that there is no sin incurred in eating the meat of the *Ruru*, the
*Pṛṣat* and other kinds of deer, or the partridge and other birds, if it
is done after having worshipped the Gods and the Pitṛs.

In the case of the offering to the Viśvedevas, when there is no
preparation for it in the house, one may eat rice and other things, even
without making the offering; but not so meat; it is with a view to
emphasise this that the text repeats—‘*having worshipped the Gods and
the Pitṛs etc*.’ If mere sanction to eat after worship were meant, this
has already been accorded before.

What is meant by the ‘worshipping of the Gods’ here is the offering of
the meat on a clean spot with the words ‘this is for the Gods’; or that
‘the worship of the Gods’ should be done in such terms as—‘this to Agni,
to Vāyu, to Surya, to Jātavedas.’ That this must be the meaning of the
‘worship’ is proved by the fact that ‘offering of oblations into the
fire’ (which could he the other meaning ‘worshipping the Gods’) is not
possible for persons other than Agnihotrins; nor can there be any
offering made to the Gods without oblations having been poured into the
fire; specially as it has been already shown that the two are distinct
actions and involve distinct methods of procedure. This mutter may rest
here for the present.

Others have explained the ‘worship of the Pitṛs’ to mean *Śrāddha*; and
in *Śrāddhas* we do find worshipping being done. It is the Pitṛs again
that are spoken of as the ‘deities’ of the *Śrāddha*. Hence it is that
in connection with the Pitṛs, all writers on *Smṛti* have prescribed the
*Śrāddha* only, and no other act.

“How can the *buying* of meat be permissible? The meat obtained from the
market becomes ‘*Sa?na*’, ‘butcher’s meat’ (which has been forbidden);
and as for the meat of animals dying of themselves, and not killed by
the butcher, this is ‘unfit for eating’, on the ground of its causing
disease.”

Our answer to the above is that one can always ‘buy’ the meat brought by
fowlers and bird-catchers; and these are known us ‘butchers’; and they
wander about from house to house, carrying meat for sale, when it is
possible to *buy* it; and it does not become ‘butcher’s meat.’

‘*Having obtained it himself*,’—the Brāhmaṇa by begging it’ and the
*Kṣatriya* by hunting.—(32)


