+++
title = "033 नाऽद्याद् अविधिना"

+++
That is called ‘*unlawful*’ which is done apart from the
above-sanctioned occasions—of the worshipping of the Gods, the wish of
the Brāhmaṇas and so forth; and in this ‘unlawful’ manner one shall not
eat meat.

This is only a reiteration of what has been said before.

‘*In* *normal times*’.—In abnormal times of distress, when one’s life is
in danger, he need not wait for the worship of the Gods etc.

“*Danger to life* has already been sanctioned as one of the occasions on
which meat may be eaten; so that such eating would be quite *lawful*,
not *unlawful*.”

True; but what has been said on the previous occasion was in connection
with the *consecrated* meat of the cow, the sheep and the goat; and in
the present text the phrase ‘*in* *normal times*’ has been added with a
view to extend the sanction to the meat of the hare and other animals
also.

It is not the mere *knower* of the law that is called ‘*conversant with
the late*’ but one who, in practice acts up to the law. In connection
with ordinary worldly acts also the term ‘know,’ ‘be conversant with,’
is used in this sense; when it is said of a man ‘he knows this’, what is
meant is that ‘he acts up to it’.

When the question arises regarding the effect of the act in question,
the text says —‘*Having eaten meat unlawfully*,’—*i.e*. in a manner not
prescribed in the scriptures—‘*he shall, on death*, *he devoured*’, by
those animals. All that is meant—is that when a man eats meat in an
unlawful manner, he suffers various kinds of pain. If these were not
meant by the passage (and if it were taken in its literal sense),—then,
in as much us it is the meat of the goat that is commonly eaten by
people, and the goat is a not carnivorous animal \[how could it ‘devour’
its eater?\]

Or, the meaning may be that the eater, by virtue of the sin of that act,
comes to be devoured by carnivorous animals; and as this would be the
result of his having eaten the goat, he would be described as being
devoured by the goat.—(33)


