+++
title = "037 कुर्याद् घृतपशुम्"

+++
People are likely to entertain such ideas as the following—“at the
*Sītā* - *yajña* the *Khañjikā-yāga*, the *Caṇḍikā-yāga* and the like,
which are performed on the authority of usage only, it is right for the
man desiring a certain result to kill animals; for it has been found
that one obtains a rich harvest by offering sacrifices at which animals
are killed.”

With a view to set aside such notions the text says—‘*It* *there is*
*occasion*,’—if necessity arises for the offering of an animal in
sacrifice,—‘*he shall make an animal of clarified butter*’; *i.e*., he
shall make clarified butter the sacrificial animal: that is, it being
necessary to otter an animal to the Gods, he shall offer, in its place,
clarified butter: which is as good a ‘sacrificial material’.

‘*Or, he shall make an animal of flour*’; *i.e*. he shall make the
figure of an animal with flour, and offer that figure to the Gods; or,
it may be taken to mean that ‘instead of the animal he shall offer cakes
and other things made of flour’.

“Why is this called *needless animal-slaughter*, when it is sanctioned
by the usage of cultured people?”

Since women, and *Śūdras* are ignorant of the Veda, such sacrifices as
those mentioned cannot be assumed to have any sanction in the Veda:
specially as people have reconrse (recourse?) to these sacrifices for
the purpose of propitiating the Gods, and no Vedic act is done for the
propitiating of Gods; for the simple reason that in connection with
Vedic rites, Gods have been mentioned as subordinate factors. In fact,
what they urge in support of the performance of the sacrifices in
question is the argument based upon negative and positive induction,
from the experience that there is rich harvest when Gods are propitiated
with the sacrifice of animals. For these reasons, these sacrifices
cannot be regarded as having the sanction of the Veda. As for the
positive and negative induction that also is entirely mistaken.

From all this it is clear that the present verse only reiterates what is
already indicated as the right course by al (all?) kinds of reasons: and
it has been put forward by the author through feelings of friendly
kindliness.—(37)


