+++
title = "040 ओषध्यः पशवो"

+++
“How is it known that killing at sacrifices involves no sin?”

The answer is as follows:—‘killing’ is the greatest injury that can
befall the being killed; because it involves such great evil as the loss
of life, involving separation from wife, children and riches, and all
the attendant evil consequences; and also because it carries the
entities nearer to the fruition of their sins in the form of hell and
the like. But when an animal is killed at a sacrifice, this killing
becomes a great benefit conferred upon it, and it is not an injury;
because it does not lead it to hell nr any such undesirable conditions.
That this is so follows from the fact that those ‘*reaching death*’—
destruction—at a sacrifice —‘*attain advancements*’—higher positions, in
regard to caste and so forth;—being born as a God or a Gandharva, or as
men born in better countries or continents—such as the Uttarakuru and
the like.

The whole of this is a purely commendatory description. We do not find
here any Injunction: the verb ‘*attain*’ being in the simple Present
tense. Nor is there any justification for deducing an Injunction from
the commendatory description,—as is done in the case of the passage
‘*Pratitiṣṭhanti etc*.’ (*v* *ide*, *Mīmāṃsā-Sūtra*, 4.3.17. *et seq*);
because in the present case neither there is, nor is there any
possibility of, any other Injunction (apart from those already set forth
in the text).

The whole of this descriptive section is supplementary to the
prohibition of the eating of unlawful meat; and the upshot of the
prohibition contained in these verses is that ‘one should never seek to
kill animals needlessly.’ (verse 37) As for the sanction (of killing)
implied in the statement—‘animals have been created for the purpose of
sacrifices’ (39),—all this is understood as involving the prohibition of
*eating* which is going to be distinctly emphasised below in verse 48.

Nor can any Injunction (such as ‘desiring advancement, the animal shall
die at a sacrifice’) be deduced from the text. Because such an
Injunction could not be intended for the animals; for the simple reason
that they would not understand it. And those for whom the Injunction is
not intended cannot be the agent; and unless one is an agent, he cannot
obtain any reward declared in the scriptures. Specially as in the
present case, the result spoken of does not proceed in any perceptible
manner from the nature of the thing involved; as there is, for instance,
in the case of the poison, which produces its results even on ignorant
persons who take it. There is no such thing in the case of things spoken
of in the Veda.

Further, since the herbs and other things spoken of here ore unconscious
beings, the ‘principle of the priests’ cannot apply to their case. That
is to say, it is found that in the case of sacrificial performances,
results are spoken of as accruing to one person (the sacrificer) from
the acts that are actually done by others,—*i*. *e*., the priests
officiating for him; *e.g*., in the case of the passage—‘he desires one
to become worse etc,’ In the case of such passages we admit of an
Injunction, because what is there stated is not capable of being taken
as supplementary to any other Injunction, and secondly because the
indication of the Injunction, is quite clear, and lastly, because the
Injunction indicated is found to be one that pertains to human beings.

In the case of all scriptural statements, we are entitled to deduce just
as much us may be reasonably deduced from the actual words of the text.
For instance, it has been declared that the Brāhmaṇa joining in the
sacrificial bath of other people should have to perform an expiatory
rite \[and we have to accent this, even though we fail to see any reason
for it\]. In the present case, however, there is no possibility of any
Injunction being addressed to the beings concerned (all of which are
inanimate).

‘*Herbs*,’—grass and the like.

‘*Animate*,’—the goat and other beasts (which are mentioned as fit for
being offered at sacrifices).

‘*Trees*,’—such as are objects of worship.

‘*Beasts*,’—those which, though not ordinarily regarded as fit for
sacrificing, happen to be mentioned, in some passages, as to be offered;
*e.g*., ‘one shall kill *partridges*.’ Though at the *Vājapeya* and
similar sacrifices, the calves are used only for the purpose of carrying
loads, yet they are called ‘beasts;’ and even though these do not suffer
actual *death*, yet the term ‘death’ in their case stands for all the
sufferings that they undergo.

‘*Bird*.”—the Kapiñjala and the rest; even though these are sometimes
spoken of as ‘animals’, yet, as a rule, they are not known by that name:
for in such passages as there are seven tame animals and seven wild
animals’, the animals meant are the cow and the rest, which are *not
birds*; in fact the term ‘*paśu*’, ‘animals, denotes *quadrupods*; or
the difference between ‘animals’ and ‘birds’ may be regarded as similar
to that between the ‘*go*’ and the^(‘)*balvarda*’ (the former term being
wider than the latter) (40).


