+++
title = "042 एष्व् अर्थेषु"

+++
The present text sums up in brief those occasions on which the killing
of animals is sanctioned by the scriptures.

‘*Madhuparka*’— has been already described. At this the killing of the
calf has been enjoined.

‘Sacrifice’—such as the Jyotiṣṭoma and the like; the eleventh stage of
which consists of the animal-sacrifice; as also the *Paśubandha*, at
which the sacrificing of the animal forms a sacrifice by itself.

‘*Rites in honour of the Pitṛs*,’—*i.e*., those of which the Pitṛs are
the ‘deities’; what are meant are the *Aṣṭaka* and other offerings of
the kind, and not *Śrāddhas*; because these latter are laid down as to
be performed with *cooked* meat, (for which the meat could be obtained
otherwise than by actually killing the animal at the rite itself): and
in connection with this the killing of animals has not been enjoined;
nor will it be right to regard this (injunction regarding the offering
of *cooked* meat) as implying the killing of animals: because the
original injunction of the *Śrāddha* does not lay clown such *killing*.
Further, the present verse also does not clearly enjoin it: specially as
what is here mentioned is capable of being taken as pertaining to the
*Aṣṭaka* offerings. If the present verse were an injunction, it would
involve the necessity of seeking for its basis (in some Vedic text):
while, as we shall explain later on, it is capable of being construed as
supplementary to another Injunction.

Some people explain the term ‘*pitṛdaivatakarma*’ as standing for *the
rites performed in honour of the gods and the Pitṛs i.e*., the Great
Sacrifices (daily).

Animals are to be killed by Brāhmaṇas for the ‘support of their
dependents,’ and the killing of animals is also permitted at times of
distress, when life may be in danger—(41-42).


