+++
title = "043 गृहे गुराव्"

+++
This verse forbids such killing as is not sanctioned by the Veda, it is
not meant, to sanction that which is already sanctioned by it.

As a matter of fact, no other killing (save what is sanctioned) is
possible in the case of the Student ‘living with his teacher,’ or of the
man performing austerities ‘in the forest;’ even though some sort of
killing may be possible for the *incontinent* Student, yet for the
Hermit in the forest it is not possible in any case. Even for the
Student, an absolute indifference to life (and livelihood) is not
considered desirable. Hence the present verse should he treated as the
Injunction of killing at *Śrāddhas*; and the mention of the ‘house’ is a
mere reiteration (Śrāddhas being performed only by the Householder).

Some people argue here as follows:—“if this were such an Injunction,
what would be the meaning of the terms ‘*in* *the forest*’ and ‘*in
times of* *distress*’? For the Recluse in the forest, even though
keeping up his Fire, there are no animul-sacrifices: as we shall show
under 6.11.”

Our Teacher however gives the following explanation;—What is urged may
be true of the Student: as regards the Recluse, even ‘self-abandonment’
has been enjoined by such texts as ‘having recourse to the Aparājitā,
etc. etc.’ So that for him there can be no killing for saving his life;
all this we shall clearly explain under 6.31.

“The present verse puts forward the *prohibition* of killing even in
*times of distress*; how then is it that you take it to mean the
permission of it at such times?”

True; but otherwise (if the text were not taken as permitting killing as
sanctioned by the Veda), it would be useless. It might be argued that it
could serve the purposes of a commendatory text. But even for a
commendatory text, some sort of basis (some injunctive text to which it
is supplementary) will have to be sought out. Hence we conclude that the
prohibition contained in the verse relates to normal times—other than
those of distress; and there is nothing incongruous in its being
sanctioned in connection with abnormal times of distress. Further, there
are various degrees of ‘distress’; and under the lesser forms of it, if
one would take to ‘killing’ animals for food under the consideration
that his food-supply was sufficient only for a month or a fortnight
(after which he will have nothing to eat),—then such killing (even
though at an abnormal time of distress) would be what is forbidden by
the present text; on the other hand, if the man fears that he would die
now if he did not kill for food,—or if a desperado with uplifted weapon
were attacking him,—then the killing has to be done; and it is this
killing in abnormal times of distress that is permitted by the text.

In this manner the Vedic text ‘one should protect himself from all
things’ also becomes reconciled. (43).


