+++
title = "044 या वेद-विहिता"

+++
The killing of creatures which has been prescribed in the Veda, ‘*has
been eternal*’— without beginning—‘*in this world of mobile and immobile
beings*;’ on the other hand, that which is laid down in the *Tantra* and
other works is modern, and based upon mistaken induction. Hence it is
only the former that is to be regarded as ‘*no killing at* *all*’; and
this for the reason that it does not involve any sin in reference to the
other world. When this killing is called ‘no killing,’ it is only in
view of its effects, and not in view of its form (which of course is
that of *killing* ).

“Since both acts would be equally *killing*; how can there be any
difference in their effects *?*”

The answer to this is—‘*because it was out of the Veda that the Law
shone forth*’;—the promulgation of what is lawful (right) and what is
unlawful (wrong) proceeded from the Veda; human authorities not being at
all trustworthy. And as a matter of fact, the Veda is found to declare
that in certain cases, killing is conducive to welfare. Nor is there an
absolute identity of form (between the two kinds of killing); because
firstly there is the difference that, while one is done for the sake of
accomplishing a sacrifice, the other is done for entirely personal
motives; and secondly there is difference in the intention also, that
is, ordinary killing is done either by one who desires to eat meat, or
by one who hates the creature (killed), while the Vedic killing is done
because the man thinks that ‘it is enjoined by the scriptures’.

‘*Shone forth*’— Shone fully; *i.e*., became manifested.—(44).


