+++
title = "051 अनुमन्ता विशसिता"

+++
When some one is killing an animal, if another person should come, and
for his own selfish purposes show his approbation, by such words as ‘he
is doing well in thus killing the animal,’—this latter man is called
the, ‘*approver*’.

‘*He who cuts*.’—he who quarters the dead body.

‘*He who* *serves*’—places it before persons eating.

‘*He who eats it*’.

All these are ‘*slayers*’.

What is meant by attributing the character of the ‘*slayer*’ to those
who do not actually *slay*, but do the other acts of eating, preparing,
selling, &c.,—is the deprecation of all these acts; all these persons do
not actually become ‘*slayers*.’ The ordinary act of ‘slaying’ is that
which results in loss of life: so that it is only one who does this act
that is the ‘slayer.’ In accordance with the rule that ‘the nominative
agent of an act is one who does it independently by himself,’ that
person alone is called the ‘slayer’ who deprives living beings of their
life; those who do the acts of buying, selling, etc., are other than
that person.

“But the statement that the approver and the rest also are *slayers*
also emanates from the *Smṛti* (and as such must be accepted as true).”

The authority of this *Smṛti* does not extend to the subject of words
and their denotations; it is confined to the subject of right and
wrong,—what is lawful and what unlawful. More authoritative on the
subject of words and their meanings is the revered Pāṇini. In fact Manu
and otther writers on *Smṛti* only make use of words in accordance with
ordinary usage, and they do not lay down rules bearing upon words and
their meanings; they use the words, they do not regulate them.

“But as a matter of fact, we do find these writers making such
assertions as ‘such and such a person is called a *Preceptor*’ and so
forth (which lay down the denotation of words).”

True; bat in such cases there is no inconsistency between what the
*Smṛti* says and what we learn from the treatises bearing upon the
subject. Nor again is there any other useful purpose found to be served
by those passages that explain the meaning of the term ‘preceptor’ (for
instance). In the present case, however the passage is capable of
serving an. auxiliary purpose by bring taken as a commendatory
statement; so that it is not possible, on the strength of the present
text alone, to regard all. these persons as ‘slayers.’

Some people argue as follows:—“If there is no one to *eat*, there would
be no one to kill; so that the *killing* is really prompted by the
*eating*; and the prompter of an act also has been regarded as its
*doer*; so that the *eater* is the *slayer*, even in the direct sense of
this term; and it is only right that the *eater* should have to perform
the same Expiatory Rite as the *slayer*.”

This, we say, is not right; because as a matter of fact, a different
expiatory rite has been prescribed, under Discourse XI for the *taster*
of the meat of the animals killed (by others).

What has been stated above regarding the *prompter* bring the *doer*,
that also is not true. The *prompting agent* has been thus defined—‘He
who by means of direction and request, prompts the independent agent, is
also an auxiliary agent, the other bring the principal one.’ And as a
matter of fact when the *slayer* kills the animal, hie is not ordered to
do so by the eater; be does it as u means of living, with the motive
that he shall live by selling the flesh.

If *prompting* means *abetting*,—*i.e*., if it be held that when a man
proceeds to do a certain act, if another person abets him and
co-operates with him, the latter is to be regarded as the
*prompter*—then, this definition also is not applicable to the present
case, in the act of *killing*, the ‘abetting’ would consist in such acts
as—(*a*) collecting the weapons, etc. (*b*) the sharpening of the
blunted axe, (*c*) the bringing up of the sword, and so forth; as
without these the act of *killing* could not be accomplished, \[and none
of these acts is done by the *eater* \].

If, however, the *prompter* be defined as ‘that person for whose take
the. work is done,’—then, in the case of the ‘teaching of the boy,’ the
boy would have to be regarded as the *prompting agent* in the act of
‘teaching’; and yet ‘teaching’ does not mean ‘reading’ (which is what
the boy actually does).

Then again, when the slayer does the *killing*, he does not do so for
the benefit of any particular person, by virtue of which the latter’s
action of *eating* could be regarded as sinful. In fact, all these
persons undertake these acts for their own benefit; and not one of them
is troubled by the idea of benefiting any other person.

“Even when the man undertakes the killing for his own benefit, such
action would be absolutely useless if there were no *eater*: it is only
when there is an *eater*, that the man’s action is fruitful; and the
*fruit* of an act is the motive, the ‘prompting force; and as this
depends upon the enter, the eater also is an indirect prompter.”

If this be so, then, when a person is murdered on account of enmity,
since the enemy would be the prompter of the act of killing, the
murdered man could become the murderer! For without enmity, the act of
murder would not be possible. Similarly when in the case of
Brāhmaṇa-murdcr, the murderer (in course of the Expiatory Rite) gives
away his entire property, the act of giving will have been prompted by
the *murder*: and as there could be no *recipient* without the giver, it
is not only the re-chastity, but the giver also that would beecome
tainted with the sin. Similarly a beautiful woman would incur sin by
guarding her chastity against the lover who has his heart burning with
the arrows of love and who has expressed his longing for her.

From all this it follows that what has been suggested cannot be the
definition of the *prompter*.

As a matter of fact, both the *slayer* and the *eater* do their
respective acts for their own special benefit: but they become helpful
to one another in the manner of two persons one of whom has lost his
horse and another his cart; and there can be no question of one being
the *prompter* of the other.

This has been fully discussed under 8.104.—(51).


