+++
title = "056 न मांस-भक्षणे"

+++
From verse 28 to this we have a series of purely commendatory texts;
there are only two or three verses that are injunctive in their
character.

‘*There is no sin in the eating of meat*.’ This assertion stands on the
same footing as verse 32 above. What we learn from the present verse (in
addition to what we know already) is that ‘*abstention is conductive to
great rewards*.’ By various deprecatory texts the impression has been
produced that ‘no meat should be eaten.’ But by way of providing a means
of living for living beings it has been asserted that ‘*there is no sin
in the eating of meat*’; which means that there is no sin if one eats
such meat as is the remnant of the worship of Gods, etc., or what is
eaten at the wish of Brāhmaṇas, and under such similar circumstances
specified above; but this only if he wish to eat it.

‘*Abstention*’—taking the resolve not to eat meat and then to abstain
from it—this is ‘*conducive, to great reward*.’ In the absence of the
mention of any particular reward, *Heaven* is to be regarded as the
reward. So say the *Mīmāṃsakas*.

Similarly in regard, to ‘wine’, for the *Kṣatriyas*,—and to ‘*sexual
intercourse*’, for all castes; but apart from that which may be alone
(*a*) ‘during the day’ or (*b*) ‘with women in their courses’, or ‘on
sacred days’, (in connection with all of which sexual intercourse has
been forbidden).

The three things mentioned, here, in their very restricted forms,
constitute the ‘natural way of living beings’, sanctioned by the
scriptures with a view to the maintenance of the body. Says the author
of the Science of Medicine (*Āyurveda*)—‘Food, continence and
sleep—these three, intoxicants and women, tend to prolong life.’

If, however, one can manage to live without these, for him ‘*abstention
is conucive to great rewards*.’ This is said merely by way of
illustration: same being the case with all ‘abstentions’ from such
things as are neither prescribed nor forbidden. Where however a certain
act is definitely prescribed, there is nothing reprehensible in the
man’s doing it, even if it be done only for the Bake of the pleasure
that it affords him; in fact *abstention* from such an act would itself
be reprehensible, as done with a view to ‘great rewards’; *e.g*. the
eating of honey, having a full meal, wearing a woolen garment and so
forth. Such also is the practice of cultured people; the revered Vyāsa
also says the same. Those acts, on the other hand, to which people have
recourse only through desire,—even though these be neither permitted nor
forbidden,—*e.g*. laughing, scratching of the body and so
forth,—abstention born these would be conducive to great rewards,—(56)


