+++
title = "058 दन्त-जाते ऽनुजाते"

+++
‘*Anujāta*’—is taken to mean *younger than the child that has*
*teethed*.

The present verse mentions the several stages only by way of
illustration, and much emphasis is not meant to be laid on them; since
the exact period of ‘impurity’ in regard to the various stages is going
to be prescribed later on; *e* .*g*., in another *Smṛti-text* we
read—(*a*) Till the appearance of teeth etc.’—(*b*) ‘When a child dies
in a foreign country, etc., etc.’ (5.77),—there is^(‘)*immediate
impurity*’;—where the term ‘child’ is to be understood as standing for
*one that has not teethed*. Thus too it. is that what the text (5.67)
says regarding the ‘one night’s impurity’ in connection with the death
of ‘persons whose tonsure has not been performed etc.’ is taken to be
applicable also to one who has teethed. It is in this way that the rules
laid down by the two *Smṛti-texts* in connection with the ‘child’ become
reconciled. In fact the ‘one night’s impurity’ pertains only to children
till the performance of the Tonsure; since in connection with those
whose Tonsure has been performed, the period of impurity is going to be
prescribed as to last for three days; and this applies to the case of
hoys before their Initiatory Ceremony; after which the period would be
ten days and so forth, as laid down in the text—‘The Brāhmaṇa is
purified in ten days, etc.’ (5.83).

Some people interpret the several alternative rules laid dowu in verses
5.59 *et* *seq*—‘Impurity due to death lasts for ten days’ etc.,
etc.,—as pertaining to the different ages (of the dying person), and
construe them differently from their natural order—on the strength of
usage and of other *Smṛti.texts*; by which (*a*) the impurity in
connection with the Initiated child lasts for ten days, (*b*) in
connection with the uninitiated for four days, (*c*) in connection with
one whose Tonsure has been performed, three days, (*d*) in connection
with one who has teethed, one day, and (*e*) in connection with younger
children, it is to be only ‘immediate’; and so forth. In this way there
would be an option between ‘three’ and ‘four’ days, in connection with
one whose Tonsure has been performed.

But in accordance with these views, there would be no notice taken of
the rule that has been prescribed in another *Smṛti-* text, in
connection with the death of the boy ‘who has completed his Vedic
Study’. All this we shall explain later on.

A person is called ‘dead’ when all his functions have ceased, and the
root ‘*sthā*’ with the prepositiou ‘*sam*,’ denotes *cessation of
functions*, \[Hence ‘*saṃsthita*’ means *de?a* \].

‘*Relations*’,—*i.e., Sapiṇḍas* (sharers in the ball-offering) and
*Samānodakas* (‘Sharers in the water-offering’).

‘*Jātaka*’ is the birth of a son, etc.

‘*The same is declared to be the case*’; *i.e*., all relations are
impure.

*Question*: “Whence is any notion of *age* obtained, by which the text
is interpreted as applying to one whose Tonsure has been performed, and
thus refering to a particular sacramental rite? In a later text, the
connection of the Initiatory Rite has been directly mentioned. But we do
not find it any where stated upto what age a child may be called
tonsured.”

Our answer to the above is as follows: By reason of its having been
mentioned along with ‘one who has teethed,’ the term ‘tonsure’ is
understood as indicating a definite age; and this age is to be taken as
extending upto the third or the fourth year.

It has been argued that—“Since there is the option of performing the
Tonsure during the first year, if one adopts this option, the present
rule (which extends the ‘impurity’ in the case of the^(‘)tonsured’ child
to one day) would be contrary to the rule that ‘upto the period of
teething, the impurity is only *immediate*’.”

This is not right. As a matter of fact, what is the extent of the
‘tonsured’ age we learn from the juxtaposition of the epithets ‘tonsure’
and ‘initiated’, which indicates that the new name becomes applicable
only upon the performance of the next sacramental rite \[so that the boy
could be regarded as ‘tonsured’ only till the performance of the
Initiatory Rite\]. In this way, the present text would become reconciled
with such texts as ‘Till teething, impurity is to be immediate.’
Similarly in the *Smṛti-* text—‘Till the ceremony of initiation it is to
be for three days’—the Initiatory ceremony is mentioned only as
indicative of a particular age. It might be argued that—“there would, in
this case be no age specified for the *Śūdra*, in the way in which it is
for the *Brāhmaṇa*, the *Kṣatriya* and the *Vaiśya*, in connection with
whom, the Initiation has been more or less strictly prescribed, as being
the eighth year and so forth.”—But in this case also, the age would be
understood as when the period of ‘childhood’ is passed; in accordance
with the law that ‘for all there is a full period of impurity.’ Thus
then, *after the eighth gear*, in case of all the four castes, the
period of impurity would be the full term’, and this age is applicable
to the case of the *Śūdra* also. In accordance with the view by which
the ‘Initiation’ in the present context is taken as indicating the
eleventh (and twelfth) year in the case of the Kṣatriya and the
Vaiśya,—there would be no age mentioned in connection with the *Śūdra*.
Though in his case also the period of impurity extends to the full time,
in the case of one who has passed his childhood; before which the period
extends to three days only: and the passing of childhood has been
defined in another *Smṛti-text*, which says—‘Upto the eighth year one is
called a *child*’, while others declare that ‘one is a *child* till his
sixteenth year.’ Those who hold that ‘childhood’ ceases after the
sixteenth year,—according to those also *purification* takes place only
after a month (the full term). It has also been declared that ‘after six
years, the purification of the Śūdra comes after a month’; and in
another text—‘one month in the case of the eight-year-old child’.

*Objection*—“The rules regarding the several ages are obtained from the
verses that follow; why then should the ‘teething’, etc., have been
specified in the present verse?”

*Answer*— True; but it bus been answered here also for the purpose of
making the rules more intelligible.—(58)


