+++
title = "059 दशाहं शावम्"

+++
The qualifications of the^(‘)*Sapiṇḍa*’ shall be described later on.

‘*Till the collecting of the bones*’;—this is meant to indicate the
period of *four days*;—since there is the text—‘The bone-collecting of
one who has set up the fire shall be done on the fourth day’.

The alternatives here laid down are in consideration of the man’s
character and Vedic learning, or of his character only; as says another
*Smṛti* -text,—‘The Brāhmaṇa who is equipped with the Veda only, in
three days, and he who has no qualifications, in ten days.’ The period
of ‘one day’ is meant for the man who knows *three Vedas* and has set up
the Fire; that of ‘three days’ far one who knows *one Veda* only; and
that of ten days for one who has no such qualifications.

Gautama (14.44) has spoken of ‘immediate purity.’ But this is for a
special purpose; all that is meant it that Vedic Study shall not cease.
During the period of Impurity, several acts are discontinued,—*e.g*. for
ten days, the food of the two families is not eaten; the making of
gifts, the receiving of them, the offering af (of?) oblations and Vedic
Study are discontinued; so that ordinarily all these acts would cease
during the period; but so far as the Student of several Vedas is
concerned, if he were not to repeat them regularly, he would forget
them; hence in his case Vedic Study shall not cease.

Similarly it is only right that an alternative should be provided, in
consideration of the mourner’s livelihood. For instance, for the man who
lives by the ‘six acts’ (of giving and receiving gifts, of sacrificing
and officiating at sacrifices, and Reading and Teaching), the impurity
lasts for ten days; for him who lives by the ‘three acts’ (of receiving
gifts, officiating at Sacrifices and Teaching), it lasts for four days,
and for him who lives by’two acts,’ it lasts for three days. If, for all
these, the Impurity were to last for ten days, then, as the man would
not be entitled to receive gifts and officiate at sacrifices, his living
would become extremely difficult for him.

Some people hold that—“there are four age-stages, and four periods of
Impurity; so that each of the latter is to be taken along with each of
the former.”

But according to this view, there would be ten days impurity in the case
of the child that has teethed; while in the case of the death of the
initiated boy, it would be for a single day only; and this would be
contrary to usage and other Smṛti-texts.

In order to avoid this incongruity, the connection may be made in the
reverse order; *i.e*., the death of the *initiated* boy entailing *ten*
days, and that of the *tonsured* child four days, the *teething* child
three days, and a still younger child only one day.

Even so in view of the incompatibility (of this view) with the
Smṛti-text, that—‘in the case of the *tonsured* child, the impurity
lasts for three days’,—it would be necessary to regard the two (three
and four days) as optional alternatives; specially as the term ‘*sva*’
refers to ‘three days,’ and the period of^(‘)four days’ would apply to
the particular livelihood of the mourner, or to the particular day on
which the bones are collected. In this manner all this becomes
reconciled with the other Smṛti-texts, which, speaks of^(‘)one day, &c,’
If, on the other hand, the option were explained as based upon the
diversity of age,—then, with what would Menu’s declaration
regarding^(‘)conduct’ and^(‘)study’ be taken as optional?

From all this it follows that on the strength of Gautama’s assertion,
there is to be^(‘)immediate purification,’ only so far as Vedic Study is
concerned—for the man who, like the person possessing a ^(‘)granary’,
has other means of living than the receiving of gifts, and who is very
much learned in the Vedas. In the case of the other alternatives, of
‘three days’ and the rest, the purification in meant simply to qualify
the man for the receiving of gifts for purposes of a living. This is
according to the view of Gautama. If this were not his meaning, then, he
would have said simply—‘for the Brāhmaṇa learning the Veda,’—and not
‘for the purpose of avoiding discontinuance of study.’

Thus, though purification has been laid down in a general way, as to be
accomplished in a single day,—yet it should be understood as pertaining
to certain special acts only. So that the ordinary period for the
Brāhmaṇa being^(‘)ten days’ (according to 5.83), there is no need for
saying anything else; from which it is clear that the option should be
admitted in the manner described above. In the case however of ‘purity’
being immediate, in the case of new born infants, and the period of
impurity lasting for ‘three days’ in the case of tonsured
children,—sinece there is no option, the purity must pertain to all
acts.—(59).


