+++
title = "060 सपिण्डता तु"

+++
Inasmuch as the present context is meant to provide information
regarding the exact signification of the term ‘*anvaya*’, ‘family’,—and
as the term ‘*bāndhava*’, ‘relation’ (of the proceeding verses) is meant
to be construed with the present text also,—the meaning of the present
verse is that persons born of the same family are called ‘*Sapiṇḍas*’
upto the person in the seventh grade. In view of the assertion—‘the son
shall make offerings to those to whom his fathers make them’.—which lays
down offerings to be made also by a person whose father is living; six
persons become recognised as ‘*Sapiṇḍas*’ (the seventh being the offeror
himself).

Further, according to the statement’—‘offerings are made to forefathers,
counting one’s own self as the seventh’—the grandfather, the
great-grand-father and other ancestors are called ‘*Sapiṇḍas*’; and yet,
while the six ancestors are called ‘*Sapiṇḍas*,’ the six descendants,
beginning with the son, are also called ‘*Sapiṇḍas*,’ Because the
‘offering of the ball’ is a single act, upon which, and in connection
with which, the title ‘*Sapiṇḍa*’ becomes applicable,—the ‘son’ and
other descendants also become associated with this ‘act as performed by
the grandson, and other descendants respectively; consequently the
person to whom one makes the offering, and along with whom he becomes
the recipient of the offering—all these come to be called ‘*Sapiṇḍa*;’
and the reason for this lies in the fact that the ‘ball-offering’ is the
only indicative in the present case; just as in the case of the
assertion ‘you should come at conch-time (gun-time)’ the ‘conch’ is the
only indicative of the time that is meant. Thus it comes to this that
all descendants upto the seventh grade of the greatgrandfather of one’s
great-grandfather are his ‘*Sapiṇḍas*’; and similarly the descending
line of one’s descendants, and the descendants of his father,
grand-father and the rest. The degrees are to be counted from that
person from whom the two lines bifurcate. For instance, among persons
who have a common grandfather, the seven degrees should be counted from
that grandfather, and persons falling within those seven degrees would
be the ‘*Sapiṇḍa*’. Similarly in all cases.

In dealing with the question of ‘*Sapiṇḍa*’, all that the text speaks of
is ‘person born of the same family,’ and no mention of the caste is
made; consequently persons belonging to the *Kṣatriya* and other castes
also become ‘*Sapiṇḍa*’ of the Brāhmaṇa. It is for this reason that on
the birth of such persons also the Brāhmaṇa remains ‘impure’ for ten
days; while in their own case the period lasts for twelve days (for the
*Kṣatriya*), thirteen for the *Vaiśya* and so forth. Thus then, in the
case of the birth or death of the person of a different caste, or in
that of the *Sapiṇḍa* of a different caste, the purification is governed
by the period prescribed for the caste of the person concerned.

In the case of the Kṣatriya and other castes, their
‘Sapiṇḍa’-relationship to the Brāhmaṇa extends to three degrees only; as
says Śaṅkha—“If of one person there are born several persons, of
different mothers and diverse castes, these are ‘Sapiṇḍas’, with varying
periods of purification; but the ball-offering extends over three
degrees only.” In this passage the term ‘of different mothers’ means
‘*born of mothers of different castes*’; the term ‘of diverse castes’
has also been added in view of the fact that persons born of mothers of
the *same* caste also are ‘born of different mothers’.—These are
‘*Ekapiṇḍa*’, *i.e., Sapiṇḍa*; but ‘with varying periods of
purification’; *i.e*., the purification of each person is in accordance
with his own caste; for instance, for the Brāhmaṇa in the case of the
birth, etc, of his *Sapiṇḍa* of the *Kṣatriya* and other castes, the
purification takes *ten* days; while for the *Kṣatriya*, in the case of
the birth, &c. of his *Brāhmaṇa Sapiṇḍa*, it takes twelve days;—there is
the further peculiarity in this case that ‘the ball-offering extends
over three degrees only’; *i.e*., it is offered to persons within three
degrees only.

Within the pale of their own castes however, for the *Kṣatriya* and
other castes also the ‘Sapiṇḍa-relationship’ extends over seven degrees,
exactly as for Brāhmaṇas; specially as in the words of Śaṅkha justed
quoted, we find the qualifying terms ‘*born* of *one person from
different mothers*’—it is only in relation to other castes that their
‘Sapiṇḍa-relstionship can be understood to extend over three degrees
only. This same fact is still more clearly stated in the following
*Smṛti*—text—‘In the case of impurity due to the death of those
relations of the Brāhmaṇa who are descendants from the *Kṣatriya*, the
*Vaiśya* and the *Śūdra*, the purification of the Brāhmaṇa comes after
ten days, upto six, three and one stage respectively.’

In the case of the wives of different castes, if the husband is alive,
the purification is determined by the time laid down for the husband. To
this end it is said—‘In the case of birth and death among slaves, and
among one’s wives of lower castes, the purification would be similar to
that of the master or husband, but if the husband is not living, it
shall be similar to that of their fathers.’

In place of the fist quarter of the text (instead of the words ‘*sūte
mṛte tu dāsānām*—‘in the case of birth and death among slaves’) some
people read ‘*asavarṇāsutānām*’ (‘of sons born of other castes’). If
such be the reading, then such Śūdra-sons as live in the house of the
Brāhmaṇa-father would be controlled entirely by the ways of the father,
and hence their time of purification would be *ten days* in
consideration of their father’s caste.

The term ‘*dāsa*,’ ‘slave’, in the text just quoted are meant to be
those that have been hired; because for born slaves we have another
rule,—viz:—‘Artisans, mechanics, female and male slaves, and king’s
officers have been declared to be capable of immediate purification’.
Bat this ‘purification’ should be understood to consist only in their
touchability, and not as entitling them to the acts of offering gifts,
feeding Brāhmaṇas and so forth; and the reason for this lies in the fact
that all the names here mentioned are such as are based upon
*professions*; which gives rise to the following questions—(*a*) Is the
purification here laid down subversive of all the rules that have been
laid down before?—Or (*b*) does it entitle the man to all acts?—Or (*c*)
does it entitle him to a few of these only? And the conclusion that
suggests itself is that the man is entitled to just those acts that may
be necessary for the proper carrying out of the King’s business. Such
also is the usage.

*Objection.—“in* the present context we do not find any prohibition of
touching \[how then can the text just quoted be taken as pertaining to
*touchability* alone\]?”

But in another *Smṛti-text* we read—‘The touching of the body is
permitted after the bones have been collected;’ and also elsewhere—‘The
Brāhmaṇas become touchable in three or four days; while at birth or
death, purification comes in eleven days; in the case of the *Kṣatriya*
there is touchability on the sixth or seventh day, and their food
becomes pure in twelve days; in the case of the *Vaiśya*, touchability
comes on the eighth or ninth day, but their food is pure in a fortnight;
the *Śūdra* becomes touchable on the eleventh or twelfth day and the
purification of his food comes about in a month.’ So says *Hārīta*; and
yet another text also—‘The touchability of the different castes comes
about in three, four, five and six days respectively; the food of the
Brāhmaṇa becomes eatable in ten days, and that of the other castes two,
three and six days later’.

The several alternatives mentioned in the above texts are he taken as
based upon the exigencies of individual cases, as also upon the higher
or lower qualifications of the persons concerned; *e.g*. the hired
slaves of the Brāhmaṇa remain untouchable for time or four days,
while-their born slaves become touchable immediately. Similarly, in the
case of the other cutes also.

Wherever ‘immediate purification’ is mentioned, them should be bathing
with all the clothes on.

As regards the purification of material substances,—all details are
going to be explained later on.

Among girls also, the ‘*Sapiṇḍa-relationship*’ extends to three degrees.
As says Vaśiṣṭha—‘For women who have got sons it is known to extend to
three degrees.’ This limited ‘*sapiṇḍa-* relationship’ in the case of
women however refers only to Impurity; as regards *marriage* what its
extent should be has been already indicated before.

The final conclusion thus is that the seventh degree is the limit, and
the persona up to and including the sixth degree are ‘*Sapiṇḍas*’. This
is what is meant by the words—‘*it ceases with the person in the seventh
deree* (*decree*?).’

‘*The Samānodaka*’ *relationship*—*i.e. the name*
^(‘)*Samānodaka*’—‘*when the origin and the name become
unrecognisable*.’—‘Origin’—‘such a person is born in my own
family’;—‘*name*’—‘he is descended from the father named so and so, and
the grandfather named so *&*; so’;—when both these are
‘*unrecognisable*.’ That is, when either of these happens to be unknown,
then also, the name in question is not applicable.

In the case of persons within the limits of ‘Samānodaka-relationship,’
all that people should do is to enter a river or some other
water-reservoir, till the water reaches up to the navel,—they should
face the south and, having offered water with the right hand upward,
without looking back, should return home.—(60)


