+++
title = "062 सर्वेषां शावम्"

+++
The same rule holds good regarding ‘*birth*’ among *Sapiṇḍas*. Just as
in connection with death several alternative periods of impurity have
been laid doom, in consideration of one’s livelihood depending upon the
six acts (of giving and receiving gifts and so forth), and also upon the
vastness or purity of one’s Vedic learning,—exactly the same holds good
regarding cases of birth also; all that is meant to be applicable to the
case of birth is *impurity* pure and simple, without any qualification
of time; so that no specifications being found to be indicated here, the
case of birth, through its own inherent aptitude, becomes connected with
all that has been said (in the way of qualifications and limitations) in
connection with *death*. On the other hand, if the words of the text
were taken to indicate the application, to the case of birth, of
impurity as specially limited by a particular period of time, then it
would be connected only with the period of ten days, which is the
principal alternative laid down; and in that case this same period would
apply to the case of Vedic Study &c. also. Or, by the closer proximity
of the mention of the alternative of the single-day-period, the case of
birth would become connected with this latter period only; and thus
having its wants supplied by this, it would have no connection with the
other alternative periods of ‘three days’ and the rest. And in that
case, even in the face of the limitations and restrictions due to
livelihood and study, the present text would lay down the same single
alternative in connection with both death and birth, and would,
irrespective of all qualifications of the persons concerned, become
conditioned by their caste only, and thus become incongruous and opposed
to usage.

“Under this explanation, the alternative periods of *three days* and the
rest would become applicable also to the women that have been delivered;
and this would be contrary to all usage.”

The answer to this is as follows:—This would be the case only if what is
laid down in the present verse (regarding the delivered woman) were an
optional alternative. As a matter of fact however, the rule laid down is
absolutely fixed. It is only thus that the use of the term *tu* “*but*”
becomes justified.

Then again, the term ‘*sūtaka*’ used in the text does not directly
denote *impurity*; it could only indirectly *indicate* the *impurity as
related to parturition* (which is what is directly express sed by the
word). But through indirect indication it would be far more reasonable
to make it express *untouchability*, which is more nearly related to
parturition. If all kinds of impurity were meant, then the author would
have used the word ‘*āśauca*’ ‘impurity’, itself; and the line would
have read ‘*āśaucam mātureva syāt*.’ From all this it follows that
another *Smṛti-text* having laid down three days (for both parents), and
the present text making no mention of any such period, what is here said
regarding the ‘parturient disabiliy’ attaching ‘to the mother only’ is
an optional alternative. So that between the father and the mother the
option applies to the father only.

The father becomes pure after having bathed. This is only by way of a
piefatory (prefatory?) statement; from what follows in the next verse
the father also remains untouchable for *three days*. (61).


