+++
title = "063 निरस्य तु"

+++
While laying down purification after three days, the author permits the
purification by bathing, which has been spoken of above. If it be
asked—“why should this be stated?”—the answer is that it is stated in
the form an injunction; by way of a commendatory assertion, and not a
regular injunction, just as in the case of the Vedic passage
‘*jartilayavāgvā va juhuyāt*

‘*Having thrown out semen*’,—after emission daring the act of sexual
intercourse,—the man becomes pure by bathing.

‘*Hence, on account of seminal filiation*’;—‘*Seminal*’ means
*pertaining to the semen*;—*fitiliation* means *begetting of the child*;
and in the event of this, why should he not ‘*observe*’— keep up—‘*the
impurity for three days*.’ The impurity due to child-birth is not of the
same kind as that which attaches to the man who has emitted semen and
has not taken a bath; in fact it lasts for three days. The period of
‘three days’ mentioned here is a reiteration of the same as occurring in
the preceding verse. For this same reason the ‘*upaspṛśya*’ in the
present verse is taken to mean *bathing* and not merely *water-sipping*;
specially in view of the assertion that ‘*s??na*, ‘birthing,’ has been
enjoined for the man who has had *sexual* intercourse.

Some people hold that when a son is born to a man, he becomes touchable
on that same day. As says Śaṅkha—At the birth of a boy, before the
placenta has been severed, there is nothing wrong in the man receiving,
on that same day, the gift of sugar, sesamum, gold, cloth, clothes, cows
and grain,—so say some: and again—‘for this reason that day is sacred,
enhancing as it does the pleasure of the forefathers: and because it
reminds one of his ancestors, there is no impurity attaching to that
day.’ In fact some people-even go to the length of performing *śrāddhas*
on that day. From this it follows that in such cases there is no
impurity attaching to the father at all.

In fact the two *Smṛti-* texts just quoted are to be taken as providing
optional alternatives, in consideration of the man having, or not
having, means of living (other than the receiving of gifts).—(62).


