+++
title = "066 रात्रिभिर् मास-तुल्याभिर्"

+++
In the case of miscarriage, the purification, that comes after as many
days as the months of pregnancy, can pertain only to the woman: us it is
the *woman* that is directly spoken of in the verse. The rule for the
purification, in this case, of her Sapiṇḍa-relation has to be sought
from other *Smṛtis* and from usage. Vaśiṣṭha (4. 34) however has laid
down the period of *three days* for all Sapiṇḍas—‘In the case of the
death of a child less than two years old, and also in the case of
miscarriage, the impurity lasts for three days.’

It is regarded as a case of ‘miscarriage,’ when it happens after three
months and before the tenth month; others hold that it is to be so
regarded when it happens before the ninth month. What is called
‘*srāva*’ (*lit*. *flowing out*) here is *discharge* *before the right*
*time*, and not necessarily the *flowing* *out* of a liquid substance.

In connection with miscarriage, Gautama also has declared that ‘the
period lasts for as many days as there have been months’ (14-15).

As a matter of fact, children born in the seventh month live; hence if
miscarriage takes place in the seventh month, the period of impurity is
full (ten days). But this is so only if the child is born alive;
otherwise it is to be as many days as there have been months.

For the woman in her courses it has been ordained that she is purified
by bathing after the flow has ceased; while another Smṛti text says that
she becomes pure in *three days*. On this point the final conclusion is
as follows: ‘Before three days, even though the flow may cease, she is
not pure; while after three days she becomes pure even though the flow
may not have ceased.’ In the text however, though the term used first is
‘becomes pure’, we find word ‘*fit*’ (*sādhvī*) used in connection with
the menstruating woman; and this means that so long as the flow has not
ceased, she is not *fit* for participating in the Vedic rites; and it
does not mean that she is *untouchable*; as it has been declared that
‘the first four days have been condemned.’ The construction thus is—‘The
woman in her courses, on the ceasing of the flow, by bathing, becomes
fit’—*i.e*., fit for participating in religious rites.

The term ‘woman’ has been used with a view to include women of all
castes; the foregoing verses having been explained as applying to the
Brāhmaṇa. The text has used the term ‘woman’ in this verse with a view
to guard against the idea that what is here laid down also applies to
the Brāhmaṇa only. In the following verses also, where there is nothing
to indicate the restriction of a rule to any particular caste, it is to
be understood as applying to all castes; as for instance, the next verse
which speaks of ‘persons whose tonsure has not been performed.’—(65).


