+++
title = "072 स्त्रीणाम् असंस्कृतानाम्"

+++
‘*Whose sacramentary rite has been performed*;’—*i.e*, those who have
been accepted verbally, but have not been actually married; at the death
of such women, their^(‘)*marital relations*’—on her husband’s side, &c.,
&c.

‘*Their paternal relations*’—on the father’s side—are
purified^(‘)*according to the rule prescribed before*’—in verse 66;
*i.e*., in three days; this rule being laid down with reference to a
particular caste.

Others have explained the second half as referring to the rule that
‘uterine brothers and sisters are purified in ten days’ (the word
‘*sanābhi*’ being taken to mean ‘uterine’). The view of these persons is
as follows:—It has been laid down that a girl should be given away in
her eighth year: so that one who has teen given away is not. spoken of
as ‘one whose tonsure has teen performed’,—just as the ‘initiated boy’
is not so spoken of; and in as much as no other rule has been laid down,
the only right course to adopt is to observe the impurity tor *ten
days*.

Others again have read (the second half) as—^(‘)*ahastvadatta-kanyāsu
bālāsu ca vishodhanam*’; and people have explained this to mean that,
even in the case of a girl that remains unmarried till she is nearly
fifteen years old, the impurity shall last for one day only; and this on
the ground that there is no justification for rejecting the direct
injunction and observing a longer period of impurity.

Our answer to this is as follows:—What is the use of the expression
‘*bālāsu ca*’, when it has been already asserted that^(‘)upto the
appearance of teeth, the purity is immediate’? It is not right to have
this assertion set aside by the present later declaration: because the
present declaration is a general one, while the former is more
specialised. Hence the ‘one day’ rule, even though laid down, can only
be taken as referring to children till the performance of their Tonsure;
specially as a general statement is always dependent upon (and
controlled by) particular ones. For these reasons the suggested reading
of the second half of the verse must be rejected as not. emanating from
the sage. But it may be taken as refering to *touchability*. There is
un-touchability due to the birth or death of a child, exactly as in the
case of grown up men; and it is only with reference to this that there
could be the assertion that—^(‘)there is purity (*i.e*., touch-ability)
after one day in the case of unmarried girls and young children,
(*i.e*., these become touchable in one day)’; and it is in this sense
that the Locative ending (in ‘*bālāsu*’ and ‘*kanyāsu*’) be comes
justified as being the correct one: since it is a regular case-ending.
If the words were taken in any other sense (*e.g*., as meaning^(‘)at the
death of girls and hoys, &c.’), it would be necessary to have elliptical
construction and to take the Locative ending in the^(‘)absolute’
sense:—‘girls and hoys having died, the purity of those living comes
about after one day’; and we could not get at the sense that the
impurity spoken of results from the touching of the dead; specially as
the former (the seme obtained by construing the line as Locative
Absolute) has its sphere of application elsewhere, in the ease of burial
under-ground; and no *touching* is possible in the case of the body
being placed under the ground.

“Since the assertion is a general one, wherefore is it restricted to a
particular case.’”?.

As a matter of fact, we find a rule regarding the *sipping of water* in
the same connection; and in connection with this, it is only the said
kind of *hatch* that is possible. It is for this reason that people do
not consider it desirable to touch the child that has touched a
menstruating woman; and this may be regarded as the qualifying factor in
the present case; is has been declared by Gautama in his Smṛti; it is
only right for such a person to set up the fire; hence it is only right
that it should be taken as pointing to the time of setting up the
fire.—(71).


