+++
title = "079 अन्तर्-दशाहे स्याताम्"

+++
Here also the mention of ‘ten days’ is meant to stand for the period of
impurity ordained in each individual case. The meaning thus is
that—‘before the expiry of the period of impurity ordained for a
particular ease, if another cause of impurity should come about, then
purification comes with the lapse of the remainder of that period; and
the second period of impurity is not to be counted from the day on which
the cause shall have arisen.’ Says Gautama (14.5)—‘If an impurity should
occur again during the interval, the purification comes with the
remainder of the former.’

‘Birth and Death’ being mentioned in a compound,—and it being not easy
to find out in which order of sequence these are to be taken,—and
intervention being possible by unlike causes of impurity also,—it is to
be understood, on the authority of usage, that what is meant is
intervention by a *like* cause of impurity (*i.e*. of impurity due to
death by another due to death and so forth). It is in this sense that
the use of the term ‘another’ becomes more justifiably significant.

The term ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ also is meant to stand for *persons observing the
impurity*.

In another *Smṛti-text* it has been laid down that—‘if it happens at the
close of the night, then it is in two days; and if it happens at dawn,
then three days’; and having begun with the statement—‘when the Brāhmaṇa
dies, the impurity lasts for ten days’,—it goes on to say—‘if no one
dies or is born in the interval, he becomes pure after the remaining
days.’ And this takes no account of any distinction between like and
unlike sources of impurity.—(78).


