+++
title = "082 प्रेते राजनि"

+++
The name ‘*rājan*’ is really applied indirectly to the man of a
particular caste as endowed with the qualifications of *anointment* and
the rest; that it is so is clear from the clause^(‘)*in whose realm he
lives*.’ In fact when the word signifies the lord of a country belonging
to a particular caste, it does so only by indirect indication, and not
by direct denotation.

‘*Till the light*’—*i.e*., it continues along with the light. That is,
if the death occurs during the day, the impurity lasts during the day
only, and it does not go on into the night; similarly if the death
occurs at night, it lasts during the night only, and does not extend to
the day. The fact that the text has used this peculiar
expression—‘*sajyotiḥ*’, ‘*till the light*’—in the present context (when
*only* day, and *only* night are meant),—is indicative of the fact that
whenever the term ‘day’ or ‘night’ is used, it means *both day and
night*; *e.g*., in verses 5.66 and 5.59. in 5.64 also, where the term
‘night’ is used in addition to the term ‘day’, it is added only for the
purpose of filling up the metre.

At night, the ‘light’ is that of fire, as we rend in the Brāhmaṇa-text
bearing upon the *Agnihotra*—‘The night becomes resplendent with the
light of fire, not with the light of the Sun.’

In the case of the ‘*non-learned*’—who does not study the
Veda—‘*teacher*’—it lasts during the whole day; it does not extend to
the night, even when the cause of impurity happens during the night.

“How can a ‘non-learned’ man be a ‘teacher’? In fact it is only one who
has learnt the Veda along with its subsidiary sciences that is entitled
to do the work of *teaching*.”

True; but a mere *expounder* is also called a ‘teacher.’ Hence what is
meant is that ‘in the case of the person who has, somehow, learnt the
subsidiary sciences (without learning the Veda) and expounds them, the
impurity lasts during the day.’ That this must be the meaning is
indicated by the fact that there is a distinct rule reference to the
Teacher who is properly qualified, or to the Initiating Preceptor, who
is the principal object of reverence.

Some people connect the negative prefix in ‘*non-learned*’ with the term
‘teacher’; and explain the rule laid down as referring to ‘the learned
man who is the teacher of other persons, and bears no relation to the
person concerned’.—(81).


