+++
title = "083 शुद्ध्येद् विप्रो"

+++
The alternative rales—limiting the period of impurity to ‘three days’,
‘four days’ &c.,—have been laid down above, in consideration of the
character and learning of the persons concerned; and the present verse
is added with a view to preclude those alternatives from the *Kṣatriya*
and other castes. The mention of ‘ten days’ in regard to the *Brāhmaṇa*
however is a mere reiteration.

In this connection the following question is likely to arise—“What is
the text that restricts the period of impurity for the *Kṣatriya* to
*twelve days* (or of the *Vaiśya* to fifteen days, and so forth)
compulsorily, on the strength whereof the present verse is taken as
precluding the other alternatives from them?”

This present text itself serves to indicate the time mentioned as
applying to those castes. And in the face of this text, the other
periods of ‘ten’ days and so forth, wherever mentioned, are understood
to be merely indicative of the period specified for each caste. As a
matter of fact, however, even in the presence of the present verse, the
mention of ‘ten days’ need not be taken to be indicative (as just
stated). For even though the section as a whole may pertain to all four
castes, yet the alternatives mentioned can pertain only to that caste
for whom the period of ‘ten days’ has been laid down. In another
Smṛti-text it is with special reference to the *Brāhmaṇa* that it has
been asserted that—‘the *Brāhmaṇa* may resume Vedic study after one
day’; and it is to this that all the other alternatives mentioned in
other Smṛti texts have to be taken as optional. In any case, on the
eleventh day there is no impurity at all.

The author of the *Vivaraṇa* says that in the present verse special
significance is meant to be attached to the use of the term ‘day’ (and
it is the *day* that is meant, as distinguished from the *night*); so
that there is no impurity on the tenth *night*; and hence it is only
right and proper that invitations to the *śrāddha* on the eleventh day
should be issued on the previous day. When a person is going to set up
the Fire, the impurity shall be wiped off by the vigil kept daring the
previous night.

This however is not right. If the term ‘day’ meant the *day* only, then
on the other days also there would be no imparity daring the *nights*.
It might be argued that those intervening *nights* would (all within the
period of impurity by virtue of the general rule that ‘impurity due to
death *lasts for ten days*’ (5.59). But what is the authority for
denying a similar significant to the term ‘day’ in this context also?

Is is for these reasons that we have explained that throughout this
context the word ‘day’ stands for the *day and night*. It is for this
reason that in the preceding verse, where the day only is meant, we have
the epithet ‘*whole*’, ‘*kṛtsnam*’ added to it.—(82).


