+++
title = "084 न वर्धयेद्"

+++
Some people may entertain the following notion:—“The various
alternatives that have been laid down regarding the period of impurity
extending to three days, *&c*., all stand on an equal footing with the
alternative of ‘ten days,’ and their adoption is not regulated by
considerations of character and study, etc.; so that the observing of
the longer period being open to me, why should I have recourse to the
alternative of ‘one day’, which would entail the trouble of resuming my
studies sooner? I shall have recourse to the alternative of ‘ten days’,
and shall enjoy the pleasure of having nothing to do for a longer
period.”

It is for the benefit of such a person that the author, moved by
sympathy, makes it clear that the optional alternatives are regulated by
other considerations; and that they do not all stand on the same
footing. In what way they are regulated has been already shown by us.

If this be not the meaning of the present advice, and if it mean
something else,—what possibility would there be of any prolongation of
the period that has been specifically fixed for each individual? And it
is only with such a possibility that there could be room for the advice
contained in the present verse. What harm could there be in the author
making still clearer what he has already said before (regarding the
regulation of the optional alternatives)?

Some people hold that—even after the prescribed number of days have
elapsed, purification is not accomplished until bathing and other rites
have been performed; as it is going to be asserted that ‘the *Brāhmaṇa*
becomes pure after touching water, etc.’ (Verse 98); and some one may
think that so long as he remains impure he would not incur any sin by
the omission of religious duties, and hence he may not proceed to take
the bath or other rites;—and it is in view of such cases that we have
the injunction that ‘*one should not prolong the days of impurity*,’—the
meaning being that the stipulated days having elapsed, one should not
delay the external purifications.

As regards the assertion that—“the use of the term *day* implies that
there is no impurity on the *night* of the tenth day,”—it has already
been pointed out that this view is not correct. Says Gautama (14.6)—‘If
during one impurity another source of impurity should arise, there is
purification after the remainder of the former’; and having said this,
he thought that people might be led to think that if the second impurity
should arise about the end of the last night, there would be
purification after that night, and in order to guard against this he has
added—‘if it happens about the end of the night, then after two nights’
(14.7) \[From which it is dear that the lost *night* also falls within
the period of impurity\].

‘*Nor should he interrupt the rites performed in the fires*.’—This is
said in view of the fact by reason of impurity all the rites prescribed
in the *Śruti* and the *Smṛti* become precluded. The meaning is that the
rites that are performed in the fires,—such as the Evening-libation and
the rest—should not be *interrupted*,—*i.e*., shall not be omitted.
‘*Interruption*’ means *omission, non-per* *formance*.

But this does not mean that the impure man should himself perform the
rites; since it is added—‘*he who performs the rites*, *even if he be a
Sapiṇḍa, would never be impure*’; which means that ‘even a
Sapiṇḍa-relation would not be impure, to say nothing of other persons’;
says the *Gṛhyasūtra* also—‘They should perform in the house-fire the
obligatory rites, with the exception of the *Vaitāna* -rite’; and
then—‘others would perform these.’ This does not refer to the mere
offering of libations that is done in connection with the setting up of
the fires, but to the performance of the rite in all its details; since
it is only for these that the employment of other agents is possible,
since the principal libation itself, which consists in offering certain
substances, can be offered by the householder himself. Hence the rites
that are precluded (daring impurity) are those of the
*Vaiśvadeva-offering* and the *Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa* and other sacrifices. Of
other nets, such as the telling of beads, the saying of Twilight Prayers
and so forth,—the preclusion of these has nowhere been indicated; and
all these are obligatory. Hence what the present taxt does is to permit
the performance of other acts; specially as another *Smṛti* text has
prohibited such acts as ‘the offering of libations and Vedic study.’
Thus then, the distinction (as to what acts are precluded and what not)
is based upon the obligatory or voluntary character of the acts
themselves; specially as the voluntary act tending to the accomplishment
of desired ends should never be done, since impurity deprives the man of
the title to perform all such acts.

“But the impure man cannot be entitled to the performance of the
obligatory acts either.”

As a matter of fact, *purity* does not constitute an essential factor in
the rites; and though an obligatory act may be done even in a slightly
deficient form (due to the lack of *purity*, for instance), such is not
permissible in the case of voluntary acts done with a view to definite
ends. It might be argued that they also might be performed, on the
strength of the present text itself. But this would not be right; for
all that the present text permits is getting certain rites performed by
proxy; and as this in itself would be a deficiency, it would be
admissible in the case of the obligatory rites only, and not in that of
voluntary ones.

With regard to the *Vaiśvadeva* offering however, there is a difference
of opinion. Some people quote the following *Smṛti* -text—‘At a birth or
a death, one shall not pour libations into fire, even with dry grains or
fruits, nor should he perform any sacrificial rites.’

From all this it follows that one should offer the following the
Twilight-libations, the *Dūrśa-Purṇamāsa* sacrifices, the Annual
*Śrāddha*, the *Śrāddha* offered in the month of Āśvina and so forth. As
for the Upākarma, its performance depends upon the lunar asterism and it
need not be done on the full-moon-day.—(83.)


