+++
title = "085 दिवाकीर्तिम् उदक्याम्"

+++
The ‘*divākīrti*’ is the *cāṇḍāla*; that it is so is clear from the fact
that he is mentioned along with the worst untouchables, and also from
the use of the name in the *Mahābhārata*, in course of a conversation
between the Cat and the Mouse—‘at that time the *Divākīrti* became
oppressed with fear’ (where it is the *cāṇḍāla* that is clearly meant).
It cannot stand for the *barber* here; for the barber is among the
touchables, and also because he is one whose food may be eaten (by the
*Brāhmaṇa*). As for the rule laying down the necessity of bathing after
a shave, this cannot be put forward in the present context, as the
bathing in this case is necessitated by the consideration that, while
one is shaving hairs are bound to fall on the body, and as, on falling
from the body, they are unclean, it is necessary that one should bathe.

‘*Tatspṛṣṭinam*’, ‘*the toucher thereof*.’—This compound is to be
expounded as—‘*tasya spṛṣṭam, tadasyāsti*’. The men who touch those
mentioned above have also got to bathe.

Some people argue that, as the persons mentioned are not all in equal
proximity to the term ‘*tatspṛṣṭinam*,’ ‘*the toucher thereof*,’ this
refers to the ‘*dead body*’ only, and not to the ‘*Cāṇḍāla*’ and the
rest. But others hold that since all are mentioned in the same sentence,
and since the term occurs at the end of all the other persons mentioned,
all these are present before the mind, and hence referred to by the
pronoun ‘*thereof*‘; so that the construction intended is that all the
terms up to ‘*śaram*’, ‘*the dead body*’, form one copulative compound,
and then compounded with ‘*spṛṣṭinam*’, ‘*toucher*’; and hence when the
term ‘*the toucher thereof*’ comes up, all the things spoken of by all
the members of the copulative compound come to the mind. There is, on
the other band, nothing to indicate that the term ‘*toucher*’ is to be
connected with the ‘*dead body*’ only; for the simple reason that it is
equally connected with the ‘outcast’ and the rest also. In fact, all
that is clearly indicated is that the term ‘*toucher*’ is connected with
some other term that has gone before; in a copulative compound however,
each term is regarded as denoting all the things spoken of; and hence
all these latter are equally closely related to the term ‘*toucher*’.
Another construction that might be suggested is to construe the term
‘toucher thereof’ with the term ‘dead body’, and then with the other
terms. But in this case, there would be nothing to justify the
connection of the term ‘toucher’ with the ‘outcast’ and the rest.

From all this it follows that it is only on the strength of usage that a
right conclusion can be arrived at.—(84)


