+++
title = "090 पाषण्डम् आश्रितानाम्"

+++
One who has renounced the scriptures and has taken to wearing such
things as the human skull, red garments and so forth, on the bans of
heterodox theories of life and morals, is a ‘*heretic*.’ Those women who
have ‘*joined*’, Such a person,—*i.e*. who have adopted his
distinguishing murks and are under his control.

‘*Those who behave too freely*.’—When a woman renounces the customs and
usages of her family, and ullowing free scope to her desires, has
recourse to one as well as several men,—her behaviour is called ‘free.’

The ‘injury’ to the husband consists in giving him poison etc.; and that
to the child in the womb consists in abortion.

‘*Those who drink wine*;’—*i.e*. those who drink what is prohibited.

On this subject some one makes the following observations:—

“The prohibition of wine-drinking is found in the words ‘*brāhmaṇo na
pibet surām*’, (‘the Brāhmaṇa shall not drink wine’); and though the
words apply to all members of the caste, yet the particular gender used
is indicative of the fact that the prohibition applies to males only,
and not to females. Though both the male and the female belong to the
same caste, yet there is a distinct difference between the masculine and
feminine genders. So that when the text uses the masculine form
‘*brāhmaṇaḥ*’, what possibility is there of the prohibition applying to
the female, who is not mentioned at all? For instance, when it is said
that ‘for the sake of a son one should make the *Brāhmaṇī* drink’ a
certain substance, it is not understood to mean that the *male* Brāhmaṇa
should be made to drink it. In the same manner when a text makes use of
the masculine form, what it asserts cannot be predicated of females. It
is true that in some cases, significance is not meant to be attached to
the particular gender used;—*e.g*., in the text ‘the Brāhmaṇa should not
be killed’, where the prohibition is understood to apply to the killing
of the *female* Brāhmaṇa also. But what happens in this latter case is
that the direct signification of the Accusative case-ending marks out
the ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ to be the predominant factor by reason of his being
what is most intended to be ‘got at’ by the preadicate; and as a rule in
the case of the predominant factor no significance is attached to the
gender, or the number or any other factor, except what is expressed by
the basic noun itself. *E.g*. the injunction ‘wash the cup’ is not taken
to mean the washing of only *one* cup. In the case under discussion,
however, the prohibitive text is in the form ‘*Brāhmaṇena surā nu peyā*’
(‘wine shall not be drunk *by the Brāhmaṇa*’,) where the ‘*Brāhmaṇa*
appears as the Nominative, and as such, an accessory in the fulfilment
of the act denoted; so that in the case of the prohibition in the
form—‘The Brāhmaṇa shall not drink wine’—also, the nominative being
denoted by the verb (with its conjugational ending), is expressed by the
basic noun (‘*brāhmaṇa*’) and comes to be taken as something conducive
to the fulfilment of the act denoted by the verb; so that the nominative
ending in this text is to be construed on the same lines as the
Instrumental in the preceding text; and it has to be taken as a
subordinate factor. And in connection with a subordinate factor, all
that is expressed by the word has to be taken as significant; for
instance, in the case of the text ‘*paśunā yajeta*’, (‘sacrifice with an
animal’), it is the *male* animal that is always sacrificed (and this on
account of the Instrumental ending marking out the *animal* as the
subordinate factor).”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—In such cases as the one under
consideration whether a certain thing form the predominant or the
subordinate factor is not determined by the Accusative or Instrumental
case-ending, but upon its being or not being already known. That is to
say, what is not already known, that alone can form the subject of the
Injunction, and this is to which due significance is meant to be
attached; and this for the simple reason that it is denoted by a word
which can have no other denotation; while what is already known from
other sources, and is mentioned for the sake of the In junction, has to
be taken as subserving the purposes of the Injunction in exactly the
same form in which it has been denoted by the previous word. In the
sentence ‘the Brāhmaṇa should not be killed’, all that the Injunction
directly signifies is the *prohibition* of the act of killing, and
everything else (mentioned in the sentence) is such as is already known
from other sources. Even so however, due significance has to be attached
to what is expressed by the basic nouns (in the sentence), as otherwise,
their very use would come to be meaningless. But the gender, the number
and other elements, which are denoted by the case-endings,—it is just
possible that these are used simply because they are invariable
concomitants of basic nouns (which cannot be used by themselves without
a case-ending); and hence sometimes these latter are meant to be
significant, sometimes not. As regards the killing of the Brāhmaṇa, no
man requires to be urged to do it by an Injunction; as he is urged to it
by his own hatred of the man he kills; and all men are, by their very
nature, prone to do this act But as regards the *prohibition* of it,
unless it were directly enjoined, it could not be got at by any means;
specially as it could not be obtained from any other source. So that,
since it is not in any way conducive to the fulfilment of an act, nor is
it the qualification of anything so conducive, hence, even though it
were to be included under the nature of man, it could not be connected
with the context. Consequently, for the purpose of connecting it with
the context it is necessary to attribute to it the character of the
*topic*; and when the prohibition in question has been made the topic of
the Injunction, it is no longer necessary to make the denotation of the
verb the topic. Thus then, the topical character having been wrested by
the Prohibition, what is denoted by the verb naturally loses that
character. The performance of the act (denoted by the verb) is such that
its performance is secured through ordinary tendencies (of men); so that
for its own accomplishment it does not stand in need of being embraced
by any Injunction; and all that it needs is the capacity (and desire) of
the man to do the act; and this, act of *killing*, being got at by other
means of knowledge, establishes the man’s capacity for doing the act; so
that it is through a qualification of the man that it becomes correlated
with the sentence. Thus it is quite in keeping with the theory of words
denoting only correlated entities. The act, along with its
qualification, thus not forming the topic of this Injunction, man’s
tendency to it has to be explained as being due to ordinary wordly
causes. As a matter of fact, in the case of killing, such tendency and
motive power is present, in the form of the man’s passion; and certainly
no restrictions of gender or number pertain to passion; or the activity
might be due to the man’s hatred.

From all this it follows that the word, whose denotation does not form
the topic of the Injunction, on the ground that it is already known,
renounces its denotative power and indicates a sense that is determined
by other means of knowledge. And in as much as gender and number are
not, even by import, signified by the word, how can any significance be
attached to them? It being necessary to speak of what is denoted by the
basic noun, it has to be spoken of with the help of some number and it
cannot be used entirely by itself; and it is for this reason that gender
and number are added.

On the point at issue thus the conclusion is as follows:

The man, who has determined to take upon himself the character of the
agent of the act of killing, is urged (by the prohibition) to what is
signified by the negative word. So that in a prohibitive sentence, no
significance need attach to the use of the Accusative ending, which
therefore may be ignored. Even sentences where we find the Instrumental
Ending, or even the Nominative—*e.g*., ‘wine shall not be drunk by the
Brāhmaṇa’, or ‘the Brāhmaṇa shall not drink wine’,—what is denoted by
them being already got at from other sources, they do not form topics of
the Injunction; and hence they are taken as spoken of only by way of
reference. In the case where the Accusative comes in as a qualification
of the motive, the Nominative and the Instrumental endings are always
taken along with the Accusative. Even when the Accusative is directly
used, that which is not already known from other sources forms part of
the enjoined (predicate), and, as such, is regarded as duly significant;
for example in the case of such texts, as ‘*bhāryām upagacchet*’ (‘one
should have recourse to his wife’), ‘*apatayam utpādayet*’ (‘one should
beget a child’) \[where due significance attaches to the singular number
in ‘wife’ and ‘child’\]. The ‘wife’ is not a a thing acquired in the
ordinary worldly manner; as she can be acquired only by means of the
marriage-rites. Nor is it a thing that has been definitively described
in an Injunction, which would strictly restrict it to what is enjoined
therein; as there is in the case of such texts as —‘*āśvinam grahṇāti*’
(‘holds the cup dedicated to the Aśvins’), ‘*maitrāvaruṇam grāhṇāti*
(‘holds the cup dedicated to Mitra-Varuṇa’), and
‘*daśaitānadhvaryurgṛhṇāti*’ (‘the Adhvaryu holds these then’) \[where
the exact character of the cups has been prescribed by the texts laying
down the dedication\], and the cups taken up are of the precise number
mentioned in the texts; consequently, their number being known, they
become connected with the in junction of the *washing*, in sequential
accordance with that number. Now in this case, there being no other
sentence, and the sentence in question itself being the originative
injunction, there are no grounds for rejecting the directly expressed
*number*; so that any rejection of what is expressed by the
self-sufficient denotative power of words could proceed only from the
mind of man. Similarly in the case of the text ‘*paśunā yajeta*’ (‘one
should sacrifice with an animal’), the Injunction pertains to the
*sacrifice*, which is of the nature of something to be accomplished; so
that when we proceed to seek for the means by which it could be
accomplished, all that is mentioned in the injunctive text,
qualification and all, comes to be regarded as the object of the
Injunction; specially because the function of the Injunction cannot be
regarded as having been fully fulfilled only by the laying down of what
is signified by the root ‘*yaji*’, ‘to sacrifice’; why, then, should not
the words be taken in the sense that is indicated by their own
denotation as helped by the denotation of other words connected with
them?

Persons versed in the science of “Pramāṇas” however regard the text as a
self-sufficient Injunction; and in this they only repeat what has been
said by other people. What we have said is easily understandable; and it
does not demand any very keen acumen to grasp it. It is the very essence
of things. The science is useful only so far as the Injunction is
concerned; anything more than that is a mere show of learning, a purely
exaggerated description. Such description is of use only in a case where
the Injunction does not supply all the information needed; as for
instance, in the case of the injunction regarding the ‘laying of
pebbles’, there being several articles such as butter, oil, salt and the
like, that are helpful towards wetting,—it being doubtful as to which of
these is to be used in the wetting of the ‘pebbles’, it is the
description (of Butter as ‘longevity itself’) which leads to the
conclusion that Butter should be used. Or again, in the case of the
‘*Ratri-sattra*’, the performance of sacrificial rites during the night
being unheard of anywhere else, the subsequent description of the ‘men
obtaining honour’ helps to indicate the propriety of such performance by
one who is desirous of acquiring honour or fame. In the case in question
however the sentence (which in Adh. 11, verses 92 *etc*. prohibit wine
for the Brāhmaṇa) is complete in all respects, at the mention of
‘*Brāhmaṇas*’; so that all needs having been fulfilled, the only purpose
served by the description is ‘commendation.’ It might be argued that
what is said under 11.96 is treated on the same footing as the assertion
that ‘the sinful man comes by accomplished happiness’,—so that the
prohibition of wine-drinking comes to have a footing, though a partial
one, as referring to the male only. But there would be no force in this;
because *females* also are entitled to partake of the butter and other
substances, which have been left after the offerings to the Gods have
been made; and they are permitted to recite Vedic texts also at the
Darśa-pūrṇamāsa and other sacrifices; such texts, for instance, as
‘*videyakarmāsi*, &c., &c.’ Even such Injunctions as ‘one should make
the performer of *Śrāddhas* drink wine’ indicate that wine is permitted
for women.

Nor is any such distinction (between *male* and *female*) made in the
case of ‘Brāhmaṇa-killing.’ So that upon the question here raised, the
final conclusion is that the prohibition of winedrinking pertains to the
whole caste—(89).


