+++
title = "094 राज्ञो महात्मिके"

+++
‘*Majestic*’—*i.e*., that seat whose character is grand, glorious; this
‘majesty’ consists in the fact that it is seated upon this throne that
the man is enable to carry on the work of protecting the people; and
herein lies his sovereignty over men. This is what is meant by the
clause—‘*and the reason for this lies in his occupying that position*’;
and what this means is that mere caste does not entitle the man to the
consideration that the rule implies; what entitles him to it is his work
of protecting the people. The term ‘*āsana*’, ‘*position*,’ also does
not mean here a *seat* or a *couch*; it stands for the duties incumbent
upon one who takes his seat upon it. It is for this reason that the
older writers have explained the present rule to mean that there is no
impurity in the case of any person who is capable of protecting the
people, even if he be a *non-Kṣatriya* by caste.

‘*For the purpose of protecting the people*.’—The meaning of this is
that all the observances relating to impurity are not to cease, but only
those that would be incompatible with the proper fulfilment of his duty
of protecting the people; for example, the giving of food-grains out of
his granary during times of scarcity, and so forth, the performance of
rites for the allaying of celestial, atmospheric and terrestrial
portents. Further, it becomes incumbent upon the king to attend to such
business as may be brought up suddenly by gentlemen; or, when it becomes
necessary for him to speak out for the purpose of settling disputes and
religious doubts that may arise among twice-born persons in the higher
stages of life.—(93).


