+++
title = "105 ज्ञानन् तपो"

+++
‘*Wisdom*’ and the rest are mentioned only by way of illustrating the
purification by lapse of time; the sense being—‘just as these are the
means of purification within their own spheres, so is *Time* also, and
the efficacy of this latter should not be doubted.’

Of the several things mentioned here, what is efficatious under what
circumstances shall be explained in the present context itself; and the
efficacy of other things shall be described in particular places.

‘*Wisdom*’—spiritual knowledge; such as is taught by the *Sāṅkhya-Yoga*.
This serves to set aside Ignorance, and removes attachment and other
impediments, whereupon wisdom becomes free from all defects. This is
what is going to be described under 108, where it is said—‘Intellect
becomes purified by wisdom.’

‘*Austerity*;’—the *Kṛcchra*, the *Cāndrāyaṇa* and the rest. This serves
to remove the taint of major and minor sins.

‘*Fire*’—is the means of purification of earthen-ware vessels and such
other things as have been mentioned as being ‘purified by
re-baking’(121).

‘*Food*;’—*i.e*., the eating of such pure things as milk and roots.

This also serves to purify in the same manner as Austerity.

The fact of ‘*clay*’ and ‘*water*’ being the means of purification is
well-known, That of the ‘*mind*’ is going to be described under 108.

‘*Smearing*;’—*i.e*., cleaning and whitewashing with such things as
cowdung, lime and the like.

‘*Wind*’— purifies pieces of grass and wood lying on the roads, which
happen to be touched by the *cāṇḍāla* and such others.

‘*Actions*;’—e. g., the saying of Twilight Prayers and such other rites.
It has been declared under 2.102 that ‘one should stand saying the
morning prayers, thus he removes the sin committed, during the
night’;—what this means we have explained under Discourse II.

Though ‘Austerity’ also is an ‘action’, it has been mentioned separately
for the purpose of emphasising its importance. In fact, in the
srciptures ‘Austerity’ is generally mentioned separately; *e.g*. in
Yājñavalkya, Ācāra 221—‘*Karmaniṣṭhāstaponiṣṭhāḥ*’—(104)


