+++
title = "109 अद्भिर् गात्राणि"

+++
The ‘personality’ entitled to the performance of acts consists of the
following factors—

1.  The person himself, *i.e*., the Inner Soul,
2.  the Internal Organ, *i.e*., the mind,
3.  the Intellect
4.  and the Body, the receptacle of experiences.

The Sense-Organs being material, do not constitute a separate factor. Of
these factors some are purified by one thing, and some by other; the
statement that ‘Time purifies everything’ being purely valedic tory.

‘*Limbs*,’ standing for the parts, indicate the *whole*, the *body*; the
sense being that ‘by water’—*i.e*., by bathing—‘the body becomes
purified.’

The ‘mind’—described (in Discourse I) as consisting of ‘the existent and
the non-existent’—becomes contaminated by evil intentions; and it
becomes pure by ‘*truthfulness*’—*i.e*., by good intentions. In a
previous verse (104) the mind has been spoken of as a ‘means of
purification’; but that has to be taken in an indirect sense; and the
present text can not mean that ‘words’ (truthful) are the means of
purifying the mind; and the Śruti also speaks of ‘the *word* being
prompted by the Mind, whence the word uttered by one who is
absent-minded becomes fit for demons and not for the gods.’

‘*Learning*’—produced by the proper study of the Sāṅkhya and the
Vedānta;—and ‘*austerity*’— in the form of the *Kṛcchra* and the
rest;—when endowed by these the ‘soul proper’ becomes purified. The
term—‘*bhūta*’ (in the compound ‘*bhūtātma*’) means *proper, real*;
*i.e*., that which is really the soul, the object of the notion of the
‘ego’ as free from the notion of ‘I’, and not the material entity
consisting of the *body*.

‘*Buddhi*’ is ‘*cognition*’—which is regarded as contaminated when it
appears in the form of a thing that is non-existent, or when it does not
take any account of the distinction between the real form of the thing
cognised and the apparent form in which it is cognised when, during
dreams and such conditions, it is obsessed by wrong notions of
things;—or ‘*Buddhi*’ may stand for that faculty of the personality
which is the product of the unexpiated portions of his past misdeeds,
and which may, by virtue of each single sin committed in the past, beset
that personality in the form of Ignorance, appearing in the shape of the
notion of diversity, or in the shape of the non-discrimination between
the Soul and the material attributes, which operates in the form of
attachment to children, wealth and such things, and becomes the source
of extreme longings.—This ‘*Buddhi*’ becomes pure by ‘*know*
*ledge*;’—*i.e*., proper understanding of the means of cognition as
indicating the self-luminous character of all cognitions. *Cognition* is
distinct from the *Object cognised*, by reason of the latter having a
shape, and it being impossible for the former to become modified, into
that shape; and hence it becomes purified by the conviction that it is,
by its very nature, unmodifiable.

The term ‘learning’ in the previous clause stands for the *knowledge of
what is taught by the Veda*; and its capacity for purification is of the
same kind as described under 11.246—‘as the fire, in one moment, etc.’

Being purified in the above manner, the person reaches the regions of
Brahman. Such is the four-fold purification. And what is intended to be
expressed is eulogy of such purification as leading to the fulfilment of
the highest ends of man in the matter of his births and other
ciruumstances.—(108).


