+++
title = "111 तैजसानाम् मणीनाम्"

+++
The name ‘*Igneous substances*’ is applied to all those substances that
melt at the contact of fire; *e.g*. silver, gold, copper, iron, lead,
zinc and so forth.

^(‘)*Gems*’—things of the nature of the rock-crystal. ‘*Ashma*’ is
*stone*; and what is made of it is called ‘*ashmamaya*’.

‘*Sarvasya*,’ ‘*of everything*’—This has been added for filling up the
metre; the justification for it being found in there being two kinds of
stone—that quarried from mountains and that obtained from river-beds.

‘*By ash*’;—since both *ash* and *clay* serve the same purpose, they are
to be regarded as optional alternatives; while ‘water’ is meant to be
used along with each of these two.

“What is the use of these?”

The removing of stains and smells. It has been declared that—‘the
purification of the unclean thing consists in the removal of its stains
and smell’;—and again‘so long as from the object besmeared with an
unclean substance, the odour and stain do not pass off &c. &c.’

Both ash and clay are, by their very nature, non-greasy; hence
purification is brought about by these in the case of oily effects.

The ‘purification’ of the ‘impure’ thing consists in making it fit for
use by removing its defects.

“If this is so, then it should be necessary to describe in detail the
impurity attaching to things—in some such form as ‘such and such a
substance becomes *impure* when in contact with such and such a
substance’.—‘But these are worldly things; and all this would be known
from ordinary usage.’—Not so; because from ordinary usage, the thing is
known only in a vague general form. Further in ordinary usage what is
called ‘impure’ is only what has become disgusting by being contaminated
by urine, ordure and blood; while what is meant by ‘impure’ in the
present context is that which is *unfit for touching* &c.; and it is
only from the scriptures that it could be learnt whence this unfitness
arises. Then again, a man is called *pure* when he does not fall into a
mistake in regard to what belongs to others. From all this it is clear
that no useful purpose can be served from what is thus known, from
ordinary usage, regarding the signification of the term in question.
Though it is generally known that what has been contaminated is
*impure*, yet it cannot be known by what particular thing a certain
thing becomes contaminated.—‘But how can the exact signification of a
term be ascertained from scriptures, when, ‘as a matter of fact, what
the scriptures provide is the knowledge of *what should be done*, and
not the meaning of a certain word, which latter is what is done by the
work of Pāṇini; that this is so follows from the fact that the *Smṛtis*
of Manu and others are based upon the Veda (which deals only with the
Duties of Man)’.—Our answer to this is as follows:—In the case in
question, we do infer an injunction in the form—‘one should not make use
of a substance that has become contaminated by such and such a
substance’; and there would be nothing incongruous in the notion that
the substance by whose contact the thing becomes unfit for use is the
cause of contamination. Similarly as regards *purification* also, we can
recognise its basis in some such injunction as—^(‘)when a thing has
become contaminated, it may be used after it has gone through the
prescribed process of washing &c.’; and yet such an injunction would not
mean that ‘purification should be done’. For if it did this, then, he
who would not do it would incur sin. What happens is that in the case of
ordinary secular acts, it being possible for the man in need to make use
of any kind of vessels, pure or otherwise,—the Scripture lays down the
restriction that ‘if need arises, one should make use of such vessels,
and not of others If it is to be treated as a *restriction*, then it
would be incumbent upon only one who seeks prosperity; and every other
man would be free to do as he chose; just as in connection with the
question of the correct forms of words, though the correct and incorrect
forms are both equally expressive, yet there is the restriction which
indicates that the use of the correct form brings merit, while that of
the incorrect form is sinful \[and this means that only people seeking
merit need use the correct form\].’—This would be true only if there
were no text prohibiting the use of *unclean* vessels. But when there is
such a prohibition, how could anyone make use of the vessel that has not
been purified? As for the rules regarding purification, these only
represent exceptions (to the prohibition of unclean vessels, the meaning
being, that if the unclean vessel has been purified, it may be used).
How then could there be any prosperity arising from what is a mere
*exception*? Since all that it means is that if one acts according to
the exception, he does not incur the sin of transgressing the
prohibition.

“Or again, the Smṛti may be taken as dealing with the explanation of the
meanings of words,—resembling the Smṛti that deals with the correct and
incorrect forms of words. As for the notion that ‘the works of Manu and
others have their basis in such Vedic texts as deal with the subject of
what *ought to be done*’, we ask—who has said that this is so? As a
matter of fact, our presumption of the basis for the assertions of Manu
and others depends upon the merit of each individual case. For instance,
in the case of the *Aṣṭakā*, which is of the nature of a *rite*, we
presume its basis in the form of a Vedic text enjoining what *ought to
be done*; but in a case where the assertion deals with things as they
really exist, the corresponding basic text, also must be of the same
kind, dealing with an accomplished entity. As regards the subject of the
exact meanings of words, the idea regarding the priority of a particular
denotation may always be derived from usage; as in this matter there is
no question of anything *to be done*. In the case in question however
(where there *is* a question of something *to be done*), it is not
possible to derive any knowledge from mere usage. Specially because
*purification* being something that can he brought about only by means
of Vedic texts, how could it ever be made dependent upon usage? If it
were, then all injunctions on the subject would be absolutely
futile.—‘But we have such in junctions as that of Pāṇini, to the effect
that one should make use of correct, and not incorrect, forms of words’
(where also there is no act to be done, nothing to be brought into
existence).’—This is not Pāṇini’s injunction at all; all that his rule
says is ‘this is correct, not that’; though it is true there is a rule
like what has been quoted in the works of the authors of the
*Dharmasūtras* all this may be learnt in detail from the *Abhidhānāsara*
).—‘In this Smṛti itself we find such injunctions as that—(1) claimants
to property shall divide it in such and such a manner, or that (2) the
eldest brother shall take four shares (9.153), or that (3) the eldest
brother shall take &c. &c. (9.105). The proper denotation of the
injunction has been declared to extend to *directing* and other factors
also.

In fact the denotations of the words are in the form of *injunctions*
and *direction*, and other factors are only supplementary to the
injunctions; for in all these cases the notion derived from the words is
in the form of *urging to activity* (towards a certain end).’—But what
sort of *urging* could there be in the case (1) of causes and effects,
or (2) of the pronouncing of blessings, or (3) of *opportunity* (all
which are sometimes expressed by the injunctive affix)? Nor could the
*taking* (of the four shares, mentioned in the texts just quoted) form
the object of an injunction; since it is what is liable to be done by
reason of the eldest brother being desirous of taking all he can.—‘But
the desire, of the eldest brother would lead him to take his own as well
as the other brothers’ shares, and hence the said injunction serves to
restrict what should be taken by each.’—As a matter of fact however,
there being no possibility perceptible of any one demanding more than
his prescribed share, there is no room for any restrictive
injunction.—‘Well, on account of the prohibition, the text may be taken
as a preclusive injunction.—This would be all right; but in that case,
if at the time of division itself, any of the brothers were to take
something in excess of his prescribed share, with the acquiescence of
his brothers, he would be incurring sin, even though the permission of
the brothers would be there. Nor could the text be taken as indicating
the man’s ownership over a certain share of the thing concerned; because
the coming into existence of ownership has been already mentioned in the
injunction of *receiving* one’s share; and what the prohibition does is
to point out that over everything else, apart from the prescribed share,
the man has no rights of ownership. But even so, if one were to
transgress this prohibition and take possession of an excessive share,
his ownership would certainly come into existence. It is for these same
reasons that ownership has been held to be produced even by *stealing*
and such acts. And for the time, apart from possession, no such idea is
entertained as that this man has no ownership over the thing.

“Thus then, it being found that the text in question cannot be taken
either as an Injunction, or a Restriction, or a Preclusion, all that the
*dividing* means is the apportionment of the shares—‘so much is the
share of this person und so much of that.’ Consequently the injunctive
in ‘*vibhajeran*’, ‘should divide’, must indicate *opportunity*; and
that the term ‘should take’ only refers to what actually happens in
ordinary worldly practice; just as in the injunction ‘the hungry man
should eat’, or ‘for the sake of the acquisition and safeguarding of his
property one shall seek the help of the king.’ Gautama has distinctly
enumerated (in 10.39) the sources, of ownership as—‘Inheritance,
purchase, &c., &c.’

“Thus then, since we have such direct Smṛti-injunctions as those of the
*Aṣṭakā* and the like (which are something *to be done* and hence fit
subjects for injunction), what is said in them regarding Impurity and
Purity can only be taken as laying down something that is entirely of a
sanctificatory character; and since this also has its basis in a (Vedic)
Injunction, it may be regarded as prescribed by that injunction itself.
So that it is only from the scriptures that it can be determined what is
*impurity* and what is *purity*. For this reason it is necessary that
the nature of impurity also should be fully explained.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—This has been explained under 135
below, where ‘fat, semen, &c.,’ of men have been mentioned as
constituting ‘impurities’; and the specifying of ‘men’ is only
illustrative, as is clear from other *Smṛti* -texts, of all such animals
as the dog, the cat, the ass, the camel, the monkey, the crow, the
village-hog,the village-cock, the rat, the jackal and other carnivorous
animals and birds, also nailed animals and the mungoose; and ‘fat’ and
the other things include also *the flesh* and the *hair*.

What is meant by the declaration of ‘purification’ (in the present
verse) is that whenever the substances mentioned become contaminated by
urine and such things they have to be sanctified in the manner laid
down; and this need not be done when they are to be used in their
natural condition. Because gold and other things are not *impure* by
their nature,—when alone they could need purification whenever they
would be used.

Or, the verse may be taken as laying down the purification in connection
with a visible act, but with a view to an invisible (trancendental)
result: just like the laying down of the rule that ‘one should eat
facing the East’

In this latter case however, the mention of ‘purification’ would be
incongruous.

As for the ordinary clearing and washing of vessels before eating those
are done on account of usage, and not by virtue of the Smṛti-rule
regarding purification (which pertains to only such articles as have
become defiled by the touch of the unclean thing).

As regards the other things that are ‘untouchable’ by man—such, for
instance, as the *Cāṇḍāla* and the like—or garlic, onion, wine, meat and
so forth,—these also are sources of defilement of substances.

What particular form of purification shall be used in the case of the
contamination by what unclean thing,—for this it is necessary to look
out for usage and other Smṛti-texts. Details on this point have
been.‘supplied by Hārīta, Āpastamba, Parāśara and other sages; but all
these passages we have not quoted here, for fear *of* having to write
too much, in the manner of the philosophical writer Chandragomin.—(110).


