+++
title = "112 निर्लेपङ् काञ्चनम्"

+++
This rule applies to two particular metals, gold and silver, when they
are free from stains; as for other metals, copper and the rest, their
cleansing is to be done with washing with powdered bricks and such
things, just as in the case of their bring defiled by leavings of food.
There is no stain in a vessel in which milk or water has been drunk. As
regards the case where parts of the vessel become stained by the
leavings of meat, butter, milk and such things, the author is going to
lay down distinct means of cleansing—‘By that from which they sprang
&c.’ (113). Then again, since the text has spoken of the removal of
‘smells and stains’, we should make use of such cleansing substances as
may be capable of removing a particular stain; and it is not necessary
to make use of ash and water in all cases. Hārīta mentions several such
cleansing substances, as ‘powdered wheat, rice, peas, barley,
kidney-bean and lentil’; and he proceeds to say—‘even when gold and
silver vessels are not stained, if they have been touched by a Cāndāla,
or by a menstruating woman, they should be cleaned with ash twenty-one
times.’

Śaṅkha however has declared thus—‘Of metal vessels defiled by a dead
body or blood or semen or urine or ordure, there should be either
alteration or scrubbing or washing twenty-one times with ash’. There
should be ‘alteration’ in the case of vessels long immersed in urine
&c.; ‘alteration’ means the destruction of the original name and form
and the bringing about of another shape and name;—‘scrubbing’ means
scratching with a sharp weapon or with stone.

Another Smṛti-text has prescribed’ (l) melting, (2) heating and (3)
hammering.’—When the vessel has been put into the melting-pot by the
goldsmith, it becomes pure ‘burning’, *i.e*., being pat into fire by
goldsmiths ‘hammering *i.e*., heating and then placing on the anvil and
hammering, in the melting-pot it bring declared that ‘all mines are
pure.’

‘*What is produced out of water*’—the conch-shell, the rock-crystal and
the like. For the *stained* conch-shell there is purification by the
paste of white mustard, or by cow’s-urine and water, or by milk. We read
in another *Smṛti*—‘The couch-shell is purified by water; if it is
defiled and oily, then by milk and water, and by the paste of white
mustard.’

‘*Anupaskṛtam*’ ‘*enchased*’, *i.e*., the chasings in which are not
filled (with unclean things), not very much defiled. This goes with
every one of the things mentioned; hence in the case of every one of
these being defiled with the touch of dry unclean things or of the
caṇḍāla and the like,—even though there be no stain,—the purification is
to be as described before, in accordance with other Smṛti-texts.—(111).


