+++
title = "115 द्रवाणाञ् चैव"

+++
‘*Liquids*’—Substances that have the tendency to *flow*; *e.g*.,
clarified butter, oil, gruel and so forth; when small quantities of
these,—not more than a seer—are defiled by the cow and other
things,—their purification is done by means of, ‘*utpavana*’,—*i.e*.,
the removal or throwing away, of a portion of the original contents. In
another *Smṛti-text* it has been declared as follows:—‘Utpavana is done
by means of two blades of Kuśa, with the hymn—‘*pavamānaḥsuvarjanaḥ*,
&c.’

Others have explained ‘*utpavana*’ to mean ‘make to overflow’; the
meaning being that another similar substance is to be poured into the
defiled liquid till the vessel becomes filled to overflowing and a
portion of the liquid flows out.

What is here prescribed is to be done in the case of direct
contamination.

In the case of small quantities, the liquid has to be thrown away.

When, on the other hand, it is the vessel that is contaminated—and there
is no direct defilement of the liquid itself—it should be removed into
another vessel. In the case of liquids becoming contaminated by the
contact of food-leavings, it has been declared ‘clarified butter should
be placed in water and Vedic mantras recited’; and it is clear that the
things have to be poured into another vessel, which latter is to be
placed in water; for if the oil itself were placed in water, it would
not remain fit for use. Similarly in the case of clarified butter also.

The said ‘*utpavana*’ is meant for *liquids*. But when liquids come into
contact with urine and other unclean things, to this extent that their
own odour and colour cease to be perceptible,—they have to be thrown
away.

As regards such liquids as have been boiled, Śaṅkha has prescribed
*re-boiling* also.

This same purification pertains to even urine and other unclean liquids,
when they are to be used by the Śūdra and others. But in this case
‘*utpavana*’ would mean only ‘overflowing’. As Vaśiṣṭha has said—‘for
things on the ground it is like water’.

^(‘)*Solids*’—hard substances; such as cooled clarified butter, curds,
sugar-candy, cakes and the like. In the ease of these, if the portion
that is defiled is thrown away, the remainder becomes purified. Śaṅkha
has declared—‘In the case of dry substances, by the removal of
contamination’.

Or, the term ‘*saṃhatāḥ*’ may stand for things composed of several
components; such as, couch, seat, bed and the like, which are
composites, composed of homogeneous as well as heterogeneous
constituents.

But in all cases, purification is obtained by the removal of
contamination.

In the case of contact with a dead body, or with unclean things that
have dried up, that part which has come into direct contact with such
things is to be washed and the rest of the thing is to be sprinkled with
water.

In the case of *wooden articles*—*i.e*., things made of wood only, such
us a scat, a board and the like made of wood—if these are contaminated
by the touch of a dead body, or a *cāṇḍāla* or Śūdra,—there should be
*scraping*.

Others hold that scraping is to be done only when the thing touches
*Ordure*; in which case, the stain and the smell have got to be removed
by scraping, and the rest of the thing is to be washed and sponged with
clay and water.

On contamination by a dog and such things, there should be washing, as
in the case of *ordure*.

In the case of the wooden bed and such things made up of wood and ropes
&c (and not of wood *only*), purification is secured as in the ease of
‘solids’ or ‘composites’.—(114).


