+++
title = "118 अद्भिस् तु"

+++
Grains are declared as to be regarded to be ‘in large quantities’ when
they are more than one ‘*droṇa*’ in weight (about thirty-two seers).
Others hold that they are to be regarded as ‘much’ in relation to
particular men and to particular time and place; *e.g*., for one who is
in a poor condition, even a ‘*kudava*’ (a quarter seer) may be ‘much’;
similarly under certain conditions, grain is regarded as ‘much’, only
when there is a large accumulation. Says Baudhāyana (*Dharmasūtra*
1.5.47)—‘One shall employ the method of purification after having duly
considered the place, time, the man himself, the substance, the use to
which ft is going to be put, its origin and condition.’

Some people would apply the same rule to *cloth* also.

Though things have been declared to be ‘many’ when they are three and
more, yet, since the text has used the *plural* number in the term
‘*alpānām*’, ‘*those in s* *mall* *quantities*’, we take it that upto
(and including three), they are to be regarded as of ‘small quantity’.

‘*With water*’ (in the second time)—This is purely illustra tive; hence
the doth is to be washed with that liquid which may be able to remove
the contamination that has defiled it. This has been already explained
before. The term ‘*sprinkling*’ has been used for the purpose of
emphasising the use of water, the sense being that‘the sprinkling is to
be done with *water* only.’ It is on account of this difference that the
term ‘*with water*’ has been used twice.

If even by washing the stain in the cloth does not go, then that much of
it should be cut off, or the whole should be cut off,—as laid down by
Gautama (1-33).—(117).


