+++
title = "119 चैलवच् चर्मणाम्"

+++
‘*Leather*’,—*i.e*., goat-skins and such other skins as are touchable;
and not the skin of the dog, the jackal or such animals as are by their
nature unclean.

The same rule holds good regarding also things made of the said leather,
in the shape of shoes, armour and the like.

In the present context, wherever Che original constituent cause is
mentioned, it includes the product also; and *vice versa*. So that the
rule laid down in connection with ‘wooden articles’ is applicable to
*wood* also. Vaśiṣṭha, having described the purification of wooden
articles, proceeds to speak of ‘wood, bone and earth’; and if the cause
did not include its product, how could the author apply the purification
(prescribed for *wooden articles*) and not for w *ood* ) to the *wood*?
In fact the inclusion of the product by the cause is only right, since
the notion of the latter does not certainly cease in regard to the
former.

‘*Vaidala*’ stands for the *bark of trees* and other like things.

In another *Smṛti-text* this same purification in laid down for
feathers, *kuśa*, skins, *chowries*, grass, cane, hair, and
tree-bark’—Here ‘feather’ stands for the *peacock’s feathers*, and
things made of them, such as umbrellas, hair ornaments and so forth;—the
term ‘*pavitra*’ stands for *kuśa*, and also for doth made of
*kuśa*;—the term ‘*grass*’ stands for *palm-leaves*; according to the
assertion that ‘the palm is known as the *king among plants*’; and the
part of the wood (*i.e*., ‘*ṭrna*’, which is part of ‘*tṛṇarāja*’)
denotes the whole, like the term ‘*deva*’ denoting the name
‘*Devadatta*’;—‘*hairs*’—*i.e*., of the cow, the horse and the goat, not
of man; as the latter, when fallen from the body, are untouchable; for
in the present context all the purification mentioned pertains to cases
where a thing has been defiled by the touch of another substance, and
not where the thing is unclean by its very nature; that this is so is
indicated by the fact that exactly the same purification has been laid
down for cloth and grain.

Vegetables have to be dealt with in the same manner as grains. That is
just as *sprinkling* and *washing* are the means of purifying grains,
while they are still in the form of grains, and have not undergone
embellishment by means of *thumping* and the like acts,—so also are they
for the purifying of vegetables also. Hence the present rule pertains to
*uncooked* vegetables only. As for *cooked* vegetables, even though they
are spoken of as ‘vegetables’, yet some other method of purification has
to be found for them; as it has been said—‘by clean water and by the
flame of fire’ and be forth. For vegetables taken out of large heaps, as
also for gruel, cow’s milk and the rest, *sprinkling* and *heating on
fire* hate been specially laid down by Hārīta;—and similarly, for all
grains in pods, scrubbing and pounding and so forth.

All this is for the purpose of removing all doubts in the event of their
being touched by foot, as it has been said that ‘all things in large
quantities are pure.’—(118).


