+++
title = "122 प्रोक्षणात् तृण-काष्ठम्"

+++
‘*Palāla*’, ‘*straw*,’ is the name applied to corn-stalks used in the
making of mats and such other things

‘*Grass*’,—*i.e*., *kuśa*, ordinary grass, and so forth.

“In connection with the mention of ‘wooden articles’ (114), it has been
remarked that the mention of the *product* implies the *cause* also;
under the circumstances, why should ‘wood’ be mentioned in the present
verse?”

It is mentioned for the purpose of emphasising the fact that
*sprinkling* alone is what should be done. And it is in virtue of this
that until the cause contamination is very serious, people do not have
recourse to scraping the wood. In the event of its being touched fay the
Cāṇḍala and such unclean persons, the purification is brought about ‘by
means of the rays of the sun, of the moon and. wind’; but in the case of
things made of wood,—such as the ladle and the like,—if the
contamination is slight, people desirous of using them in connection
with food &c., should have recourse to sprinkling and scraping.

‘*Sweeping*’—is the dealing of the house, which consists in removing of
the stains of smoke and such things.

‘*Smearing*’—*i.e*., rubbing the floor with cow-dung, lime or some such
thing.

All this should be understood to be necessary in the ‘case of the whole
wall of the house becoming defiled by the touch of a dead body, *a
cāṇḍala*, a menstruating woman and such persons; while in the case of
only a portion of the wall being defiled, only that part should be
*smeared*. Bat in the case of defilement by a dead body falling on the
roof, walls should be scraped, rays of the sun should be made to enter
the house, and the inside should be exposed to flames of fire; and in
some cases *re-building* also has been laid down. All this comes under
the term ‘*clearing*’.

Of earthen articles, there should be ‘*re-baking*’. That is, when it has
been touched by a man with unwashed mouth, it shall be heated on fire;
actual *rebaking* is to be done only in the case of its bring defiled by
such undean things as a *wine-keg* and the like. When however it is
touched by the wine itself, it should be thrown away. This is what has
been thus declared by Vaśiṣṭha (3.59)—‘An earthen article is not
purified by rebaking, if it has been touched by wine, mine, ordure,
spittings, pus and blood’.—(121).


