+++
title = "125 पक्षि-जग्धङ् गवा"

+++
The use of the term ‘eaten’ indicates that the text pertains to *food*.

‘*By birds*’—*i.e*., parrots and other birds that are eatable—what has
been eaten out of (rendered a ‘leaving’). This does not apply to what
may have been eaten by the crow, the vulture and other such birds; as in
connection with this extensive expiatory rites have been prescribed
under the text ‘what has been licked by a bird &c., &c.,’ which lays
down the expiration to be performed in the case of food which, by
itself, is quite pure. Thus it is that there is no purification for food
that has been eaten out of by the cow, in connection with the eating of
which a similar elaborate expiation has been laid down. Though such may
be the law, yet it is necessary to find out other Smṛti-texts and usage
bearing upon the subject. As a matter of fact, when food, larger in
quantity than ten cupfulls, has been defiled by the crow and other such
birds, what cultured people do is to throw away just that portion of it
that has been touched, and make use of the remainder after having
purified it; but if it is less than ten cupfulls, they throw it away.
Here also the peculiar circumstances of each case have to be taken into
consideration.

In another Smṛti-text, food defiled by the black birds has also been
prohibited.

‘*Blown upon*’—with breath from the mouth, or over which a piece of
cloth has been shaken for the purpose of being dusted.

^(‘)*Sneezed at*’—that food on which some one has sneezed.

^(‘)*Hair*’—of men from their heads.—^(‘)*Insects*’—small organisms;
some of these, born out of moisture in the house, if they fall upon the
food while living, they do not defile the food; just as is the case with
flies. The present purification is laid down for the case where *dead*
insects tall on the food. Those insects, on the other hand, that are
born out of impure sources, or which live upon dirt, they defile the
food, even when living. Says Gautama (17.89)—^(‘)What is defiled by hair
and insects is ever uneatable.⁹ When the food happens to be covered by a
large number of these, the whole of it should be thrown away.

In the case of large heaps of food, if a small portion of it happen to
be contaminated by impure insects, that much alone of the food has to be
thrown away and the remainder is purified.

In the case of contamination by hair, another Smṛti has laid down that
the food shall be touched by vessels of gold, silver, *kuśa* and gems,
along with water. In certain works *heating* also has been prescribed.

Some people have taken this verse as laying down a rule for the
purification of *land*. But they go against—(*a*) other Smṛti-texts,
(*b*) usage and (*c*) the direct meaning of the text.—(123).


