+++
title = "126 यावन् नाऽपैत्य्"

+++
‘*Unclean*’—Untouchable.

“If that be so, then what is not eatable by the person concerned, that
alone will be a source of contamination for him; e g., wine and spirit
would be^(‘)unclean’ for the *Brāhmaṇa*, but not for the *Śūdra*.”

This is not right; because substances intended as offering-materials at
a sacrifice are ‘not eatable’, before the offerings have been made; and
yet they are not^(‘)untouchable As for wines and spirits, even the
*touching* of these has been prohibited, for the *Brāhmaṇa*. So that
that thing may be regarded as a source of contamination for a man the
*touching* of which has been prohibited for him. So that what is true
is, not^(‘)what is *not eatable* is *untouchable*,’ but that ‘what is
*untouchable* is *not eatable*.’

‘*Tainted*’—besmeared; contaminated.

‘*So long*’,—this prescribes repetition of the act.

‘*Earth and water*’;—all this to be is used only if there is need for
it; and the *need* would consist in the removing of the smell and stain.
So that in the case of the touch of such unclean things as are dry, or
in the case of the contamination having

taken place long ago,—since the smell and stain would have been removed
by the lapse of time,—washing with earth and water should have to be
done once only.

“The use of earth and water is for a visible purpose,—since it is only
by their use that the stain is removed and the thing is purified; what
then is the use of the phrace ‘*as long as &c*.’?”

The explanation is as follows:—The qualifying phrase has been added with
a view to exceeding the restricted number of applications, specifically
laid down in such texts as —‘ once to the urinary organ, thrice to the
anus &c, &c.’ (3.448); the sense being that if the removal of the stain
&c., of the excretions be found to be impossible by the restricted
number of applications, the said restrictions are to be ignored and more
applications used. All that the mention of the exact, number of
applications means is that even if the smell and stain be removed by a
less number of applications, the prescribed number must be made up.

‘*Earth and water*’ have been mentioned only as indicating things that
may be used as a means of purification. Hence even though the
contaminating substance may have been washed off by water, yet it should
be rubbed with saline substances, so that not a trace of the substance
may he visible.

‘*Disappear*’—go off, cease.

‘*Caused by it*’—caused by the *unclean* substance. Hence there would be
no contamination if the smell of such substances as musk and the like
did not disappear from clothing &c. But in the case of a thing painted
with *kuṅkuma* and such substances, if any portion of it should happen
to be contaminated by an unclean thing, then the *kuṅkuma* also has to
be removed from that portion; and this for the simple reason that the
*kuṅkuma* also is in contact with the unclean thing; specially there
also the^(‘)smell and taint’ are present. If however the colour of
*kuṅkuma* happens to be attached to one’s body, and it cannot be removed
by rubbing, then purification may be attained (even by the use of earth
and water).—(124).


