+++
title = "127 त्रीणि देवाः"

+++
‘*Pavitram*’—pure.

The mention of the gods is by way of commendation.

The term ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ includes, according to usage, all castes.

‘*What is not seen*’;—a thing that, though lying in an unprotected
place, is yet not actually seen to have been contaminated by the touch
of the dog, the crow or such other things. The mere presence of such
animals should not be made the ground for suspecting actual defilement,
until it is actually perceived. Similarly there can be no harm in a man
partaking of food prepared in the kitchen by cooks and others who may
have done the cooking without having themselves undergone a cleansing
process \[if anything unclean is not actually perceived\].

In this connection, no one should entertain the idea that—‘there would
be nothing wrong in the partaking of food if the defilement were
entirely unknown.’ As this would be contrary to what has been declared
(in 5.20) regarding the sinfulness of eating certain things
*unintentionally*.

Thus the conclusion is that a thing is to be regarded as *pure* in
connection with which no contamination is known by any of the recognised
means of knowledge. But when, even in the absence of definite proof,
there be even the slightest and most far-fetched suspicion regarding
contamination, the thing concerned should be washed with water. *E.g*.
when from among a large number of dishes and cups lying in the same
place, if even *one* has been seen to be contaminated by the touch of
the dog or some such thing, all the rest of them also should be washed
with water.

To this same category (of ‘*what is not seen*’) belongs also ‘*what is
commended by word*.’ That is cultured men should be made to pronounce
the thing to be *pure*. They say that things become pure by the
Brāhmaṇa’s word. The *present tense* in ‘*praśasyate*’, ‘*is
commended*’, has the force of the *Injunctive*.

Some people explain the^(‘)commendation’ here spoken of as follows “When
the person going to make use of a certain thing has seen it being
defiled, even if he does not himself see it being purified, he should
believe it to have been purified if cultured people assure him that it
has undergone purification.”

This however is not right. Since the assertion of a trustworthy person
has nowhere been spoken of as being unreliable, to assert it here would
be a needless repetition.

Others have explained the term ‘*what is washed with water*’ as meant to
be an example,—and the ‘*unseen*’ and the ‘*commended by word*’ as the
two whose purity is here enjoined; the sense being—‘Just as what is
washed with water is pure, so also should be regarded *what is not seen*
and *what is commended by word*’

“If everything is *pure*, in which no contamination is cognised by
either Perception or Inference or Verbal Authority,—then why should the
*Cāndrāyaṇa* have been prescribed (under 5.21) as to be performed for
the expiation of the sin of having partaken of defiled food, without
knowledge *?*”

What has been said under 5.21 is in connection with what is *At for
being eaten*; while the present text deals with *purification* in
general. Or, a distinction may be drawn between the two declarations,
either on the ground of one referring to cases of more serious
defilement than the other, or on the ground of one referring to times of
distress and the other to normal times.—(125)


