+++
title = "129 नित्यं शुद्धः"

+++
‘*Kāru*’ is artisan; such as the cook; the dyer, the weaver and so forth
the hand of these people is ‘*always* *pure*.’ It is for this reason
that they are touchable even during periods of impurity caused by birth
or death. But it does not mean that their hand is to be regarded as pure
even when found to be actually bearing the stains of ordure or such
unclean things.

What is stated here is on the same footing with what as been asserted
before regarding certain people being ‘immediately purified.’ Nor is
there any superfluous repetition; as no such purification has been
declared anywhere else in the Institutes of Manu. Then the present text
contemplates another case also, *e.g*. weavers, as a rule, weave cloth
without bathing for separating the yarns from the pillars they make use
of dough and gruel &c.;—they place the vessels containing these things
at random:—the ‘impurity’ involved in all this is what is negatived by
the present text; and it is not meant that people who are impure by
their very nature are to be regarded as ‘touchable’ by taking to the
work of artisans; because such work has not been ordained for them.

This same reasoning holds good regarding the view that things touched by
*Mlecchas* are not impure. In connection with these, *sprinkling* and
*washing* have to be done, as laid down by Śaṅkha, who reads—‘The
artisan’s hand is pure, and so also are substances in a heap.’

‘*Merchandise*’;—the substance that is sold for money, or is exchanged
for some other substance, is called ‘*merchandise*’; and when this is
‘*spread out*’ in the market-place, it is pure. That is, it does not
become defiled by such contaminations as being handled by several
purchasers, being spread out on unwashed ground and so forth, even
though one may perceive such contaminations again and again. Since the
text speaks of its being ‘*spread out*’, it follows that so long as the
thing is stored within a room, it is not pure, even though it is ‘in the
market-place’.—As regards cooked substances, such as fried flour, cakes
and the like,—though these also are ‘pure’ (when spread out in the
market-place), yet they are not fit for eating; as declared by
Śaṅkha—‘things exposed in the marketplace are not fit for eating’.

‘*Held by the student*’.—By reason of the ‘purity’ being spoken of in
this verse along with this term, it is to be regarded as pertaining to
such contamination as the following—(*a*) treading along the public road
in course of begging (*b*) the sight of unclean objects, (*c*) spitting
and sneezing, (*d*) the dropping of one hand on the food obtained and so
forth,—all which are probable.

‘*Sacred*’;—this is meant to imply *purity*—(127).


