+++
title = "141 नोच्छिष्टङ् कुर्वते"

+++
In the text—‘on having spat and on having told a lie &c.’ (5.144)—it has
been laid down that on spitting one should sip water; which indicates
that until one has sipped water, he remains impure. Drops issuing from
the mouth would also be a form of ‘spitting;; so that the issuing of
drops of water from the mouth standing on the same footing as the
spitting of phlegm, it might be thought that it should necessitate the
sipping of water. With a view to this contingency, the author has added
the present verse.

‘*Mukhyaḥ*’— produced in, or issuing from, the mouth such ‘*drops*’ do
not make one impure, if they do not fall upon the body.

“But it has been already declared that drops are pure (5-132.)”

But that was with reference to things other than bodily excretions. That
this was meant there is clearly indicated by the present verse; which
makes it clear that *all kinds of drops* were not meant when they were
declared to be pure.

‘*Śmaśruṇi*’—hairs of the beard,—‘*that enter the mouth*’—‘do not make
one impure’; this has to be construed with the present phrase; so that
they do become the cause of some slight evil effects (even though they
do not make the man impure).

So also ‘*what adheres to the teeth*.’ In connection with this we have
greater details in another *Smṛti text*—‘What adheres to the teeth is
like the teeth, except what is touched by the tongue;—some say that this
is so before it falls off from the teeth;—what falls off is to be
treated as saliva the man becomes pure by swallowing it.’ (*Gautama*
1.38 to 40.) ‘Those that fall off’—*i.e*. without bang touched by the
tongue: since the touch of the tongue has been declared to be not
pure.—(139).


