+++
title = "143 उच्छिष्टेन तु"

+++
The man who has committed something necessitating ‘washing’ is called
‘unclean’. For instance, one who has passed urine or evacuated his
bowels, and has not performed the purificatory ablutions; or when he has
been defiled by the contamination of some unclean thing.

‘*With some substance in hand*;’—the person who is holding in his hand
some thing to be eaten or some metal or cloth, &c., is called
‘*dravyahastaḥ*’, the use of the compound being similar to such
compounds as ‘*khadgahastaḥ*’.

If such a person happens to be touched, then ‘*without laying
down*’—without setting aside—‘*that substance*’—he should wash.

“How can the man wash, when he has a substance in his hand? The
procedure of washing has been described as ‘washing the hand upto the
wrists and so forth.”

In answer to this some people offer the following explanation:—What is
meant by the man being ‘with some substance in hand’ is that he should
have the substance somewhere on his body, not necessarily in his hands.
Similarly in the case of impurity also if the man become defiled, the
contamination affects substances that may be lying on his shoulders
also. Similarly purification is obtained by washing. Hence the man
should perform the washing by removing the substance from his hand and
keeping it on his fore-arm, in his lap or in some other part part of his
body. The meaning is that just as the impurity of the man makes the
substance impure so also; the purification of the man renders the
substance pure.

Gautama has declared that—‘The man with a substance in hand, happening
to become unclean, should wash after *having kept away the substance*’
(1.28). This they explain as follows: Though both (*washing* and
*keeping away*) are spoken of together, yet it is the *keeping away*
that is meant to be enjoined by this text, otherwise all that would be
necessary in the circumstances would be the purifying of both himself
and the substance; and where would there be any necessity for the
*keeping away* of the substance? Hence, since, in the absence of the
text quoted, there would be no possibility of the *keeping away*, this
text must be taken as meant only for enjoining this latter. “How then
would the substance be purified?” It would be purified by being held by
the pure person,—or by the ‘washing’ prescribed by another *Smṛti-text*:
viz: ‘while dealing with foods and drinks if one happens to touch an
unclean thing, he should wash the article and then sip water: in this
manner it does not become defiled.’

“In the present verse nothing is said regarding the necessity of having
to keep away the substance, and yet if it were to be taken as implied,
the phrase ‘*without laying down*’ would be absolutely futile.”

As a matter of fact, the same purpose runs through all *Smṛtis*; and yet
from the direct words of the texts in the present instance we understand
that there is a clear difference of opinion (between Manu and Gautama).
So that the two should be regarded as optional alternatives; and the
rule determining the option would be that—(*a*) if the substance is a
heavy one it shall be laid aside, otherwise it may be kept on the
body,—or (*b*) when the man himself eats the food (carried), or he
touches a large quantity of unclean things, or is touched by a person
who should have washed but has not yet washed,—in all these cases the
touching of the substance would be a source of uncleanliness (141)


