+++
title = "157 कामन् तु"

+++
What has been said in the preceding verse is explained more specifically
in the present verse.

As in the case of men, so in that of women also suicide is forbidden. As
for what Aṅgiras has said—‘they should die after their husband’,—this
also is not an obligatory act, and so it is not that it must be done.
Because in connection with it there is an eulogium bestowed upon the
results proceeding from such suicide. Thus then, the performing of the
act being possible only for one who is desirous of obtaining the said
result, the act stands on the same footing as the *Śyena* sacrifice.
That is, in connection with the *Śyena* sacrifice we have the Vedic
text—‘one may kill living beings by means of the Śyena sacrifice,’—and
this makes the performance of this sacrifice possible; but only for one
who has become blinded by extreme hatred; so that when the man does
perform the act, it does not become regarded as ‘Dharma,’ a ‘meritorious
act’; exactly in the same manner, when the widow happens to have a very
strong desire for the results accruing from the act of suicide, it is
open to her to disobey the prohibition of it and kill herself; but in so
doing she cannot be regarded as acting according to the scriptures. From
this it is clear that the act of killing herself after her husband is
clearly forbidden for the woman. Further, in view of the distinct Vedic
text—‘one shall not die before the span of his life is run out’—being
contradicted by the Smṛti-text of Aṅgiras, this latter is open to bring
assumed to have some other meaning. Just as in the case of the Smṛti
rule ‘one should take the final bath after having read the Veda’,—the
injunction of the bath, as pertaining to one who has not yet studied the
meaning of the Vedic texts, has been taken as having a different
meaning.

It may happen so that the widow is childless, has not inherited any
property from her husband and has to maintain herself by spinning or
some such work; and she does not wish to marry again, because her
husband was very dear to her and any disregard for him would be against
the scriptures and is even distinctly forbidden; so that knowing that in
abnormal times of distress all transgressions are permissible,—as was
the case when Viśvāmitra partook of the dog’s thigh—she might, being
pinched for a living, be tempted to some transgression. It is with a
view to such a case that the author has put forward the present text.

Under the stated circumstances ‘*well might*’ the woman
‘*macerate*’—reduce—‘*her body*’—‘*by means of flowers, roots and
fruits*’;—*i.e*., she might maintain herself upon these, according as
they may be available; ‘*but she shall not even mention the name of
another man*’—by saying to him ‘you are my husband to-day’.

As for the text—‘When the husband is lost or killed or become a
renunciate, or is found to be impotent, or become an outcast,—under
these five difficulties, another husband is sanctioned for women’
(Parāśara—what is meant is that she may for the purpose of obtaining a
living by doing such work of as that of the *maid* &c., have recourse to
another man *as her protector*,— this being the literal meaning of the
term ‘*pati*’.

This shall he fully dealt with under discourse IX.

This rule also is applicable to the woman whose husband has gone out on
a journey.

The use of the term ‘*kāmam*’—‘well might’—is meant to indicate the
author’s displeasure at the course of conduct suggested; the sense
being—‘the emaciating of the body is bad, and worse still is the set of
having intercourse with another man.’—(155).


