+++
title = "159 अनेकानि सहस्राणि"

+++
The preceding verse has prohibited intercourse with another man for the
purpose of maintenance; the present verse prohibits it, if betaken to
for the purpose of continuing the race.

It has been declared that ‘there is no heaven for the childless person
(‘aputrasya’).’ But in this sentence no significance attaches to the
masculine gender used. In view of this text a widow might be prompted to
take to another husband; and it is for meeting such a case that we have
the present text.

‘Many thousands of unmarried students’—life-long celebates—‘*have gone
to heaven*’—do go to heaven.

As for the^(‘)*Niyoga*’ that is prescribed for the widow in Discourse
IX, that refers to a case where she is commanded to do so by her elders
and not where she herself desires offspring.

‘*Without having perpetuated their race*’—The begetting of offspring is
for the purpose of perpetuating one’s race; and they did not do it;
*i.e*., they did not beget children.

‘*Many, anekāni*’.—In a negative compound the latter term forms the
predominant factor: hence the use of the plural ending is open to
question. Even though the compound contains the *negation of unity*, vet
plurality is inadmissible. What the word signifies therefore is a very
large number, though its exact nature is not expressed, and the
character of *unity* is abandoned. Just as it is in the case of such
words as ‘*modat*’ (*?*), ‘*grāmaḥ*’ and the like which denote
*multitude*. Says the author of the *Cūrṇikā*—‘The form *anekasmāt*
becomes justified where he has declared the correctness of the use of
the singular number.

Or, the term ‘*aneka*’ may signify^(‘)alone, helpless’; the meaning
being ‘the men who had become helpless by the death of their
wife.’—(157).


