+++
title = "001 षट्त्रिंशद्-आब्दिकञ् चर्यम्"

+++
Two kinds of Religious Students have been described above—the life-long
student and the student for a limited period. Verse 2.244—where it is
said that ‘he serves the Preceptor till the dissolution of his body’—has
described the life-long studentship; while verse 2.108—where the ‘Final
Return’ has been described as the limit—has indicated the other
alternative. As regards the ‘Life-long Student,’ the mention of the
name, itself, which is based upon reason, serves to indicate the limit
of the period of studentship; the term ‘*naiṣṭhika*’ meaning that which
goes to the very ‘*niṣṭhā*.’ or end of a thing; and the exact period has
been stated by the direct declaration that ‘it extends to the
dissolution of the body.’ As regards the ‘limited’ studentship, we have
the following texts bearing upon it:—(*a*) ‘by this course of
application etc.,’ (6. 85), (*b*) ‘the entire Veda should be acquired by
means of particular austerities and several observances prescribed by
Injunctions’ (2.165); and since these texts do not specify any
particular number of Vedas to be learnt, it would seem as if these
injunctions intended the pupil to learn one, two, three, four, five six,
seven or any other number of Vedic texts, in fact, as many as he could
learn. The present verse proceeds to restrict the number of Vedas to be
learnt.

‘*Duties relating to the Three Vedas should be observed*.’—‘*Relating to
the three Vedas*’ means ‘conducive to the learning of the three Vedas;’
the act of ‘learning’ being implied by the compound, on the strength of
the fact that the ‘getting up of the Veda’ has been presented
before.—‘*Duties*’—*i.e*., the whole lot of duties laid down for the
Religious Student,—‘*should be observed*’—one shall observe them; the
verbal affix having the injunctive force.

From the above it might be assumed that the duty of ‘fetching the fuel’
and the rest also should continue to be kept up only till the texts have
been got up (and no longer); and, in order to preclude this notion, the
text adds—‘*for thirty-six years*;’ which means that even after the Veda
has been got up, the full period has to be completed.

“If the detailed duties, that have been laid down are related to the
injunction of learning the Veda,—and this Injunction ceases to be
operative after the Veda has been learnt,—then why should the
observances of studentship be continued for twelve years, even after the
Veda has been learnt?”

What you say is too little. You might say the same in regard to the
performance, at the *Darṣa-pūrṇamāsa*, of all those secondary details
that come after the *Āgneya* and other primary offerings. The fact of
the matter is that, just as in the case of the sacrifice, the due result
is obtained only when the act is performed along with all its details,
so in the case in question also the fulfilment of the Injunction (of
Learning) is complete only after the act has been performed along with
all the details in the duly prescribed order.

“There are several lesser alternative periods—half, and quarter of the
full period—mentioned as the limit for study; and when these are
permitted, who is there who would keep up the observances, which require
such effort, for twelve years?”

Pupils, desirous of more extensive results, will have recourse to the
carrying out of the larger details. To this effect we have the
saying—‘when there is greater effort, there must follow larger results.’

“As a matter of fact, the learning of the Veda, through study, does not
lead to any other result except the understanding of the meaning of
Vedic texts. They say that—‘the revered Ritualists do not regal’d mere
learning as the result;’ and in the *Śabara-bhāṣya* also we read—‘the
purpose served by it has been found to consist in the comprehension of
what should be done.’ And certainly, there is no diversity (or divergent
grades) in the said comprehension.”

If that be so (if the comprehension of meaning were the sole end of
Vedic Study), then, inasmuch as such comprehension could come about at
the time of learning the Text, even without the keeping of any
observances, there should be no keeping of the observances at all. Then
again, who says that the Injunction of Vedic Study is for the purpose of
comprehending the meaning of Vedic texts? In fact, the Injunction of
Vedic Study is for the purpose of Vedic Study itself; there is no reason
for regarding one thing as being for. the purpose of another thing. As
for the comprehension of meaning, it follows after the Text Las been
learnt, by the very nature of things, and not by virtue of the
Injunction.

“Then, is the Injunction meant for one who desires Heaven?”

How can this also be possible?

“What, then, is the meaning of your assertion that there are larger
results obtained (when the act is performed along with more extensive
details)?”

The meaning of the statement is as follows:—The whole Injunction
prescribes a sanctiticatory process, in which ‘Vedic Study’ forms the
predominant factor, by reason of the sanctification being accomplished
during that ‘study.’ And Injunctions of sanctifications do not stand in
need of the direct mention of the result the seeker whereof would be
entitled to their performance; in fact, through the object sanctified,
they become part and parcel of another Injunction in connection with
which a particular result has been mentioned. For example, we have the
Injunction ‘the corns should be threshed and this ‘threshing’ becomes
related to the transcendental results proceeding from the
Darśa-pūrṇamāsa sacrifices,—not by itself, but—only through the removal
of the chaff which goes to purify the corns of which is made the cake
used at the *Āgneya* and other offerings making up the
*Darśa-Pūrnamāsa*; and it is thus that the threshing comes to be
recognised as something to be done. In the same manner, the Veda cannot
be regarded as something to be sanctified or refined, except as
subordinate to something else. As a matter of fact, we find that the
comprehension of meaning actually follows after ‘Vedic Study from which
it follows that this act of ‘study’ itself extends up to the
comprehending of the meaning, just as the act of ‘threshing’ extends up
to the accomplishment of the Rice. The only difference in the two cases
is as follows:—By reason of its injunction occurring in the same
context, the ‘threshing’ becomes quickly recognised as related to
another Injunction mentioning a result; while the Injunction in question
(of Vedic Study) does not occur in the context of any particular act,
and is regarded as extending up to the comprehension of meaning; so that
its connection with results is only implied by the fact of its being of
use in the performance of all those acts that are enjoined as leading to
various results. Thus the fact that an Injunction aims at some useful
purpose of man is readily understood; and it makes no difference whether
it does so directly or indirectly. And since its connection with a
result is clearly implied, the Injunction in question gets itself
carried out independently by itself, even though the comprehension of
meaning is of use in connection with the injunctions of compulsory and
voluntary acts.

Some people have held the view that—“the injunction of Vedic Study
serves, through the comprehension of meaning, the same purpose as the
injunctions of the Jyotiṣṭoma and other acts, and that the additional
effort (involved in Vedic Study and comprehension of meaning) serves to
enhance the quality of the results brought about by those acts.” But
what fault has the Injunction of ‘becoming a Teacher’ done for those
people, that they should have made great efforts to deny the view that
this latter also serves the same purpose as the Injunction of ‘Vedic
Study?’ If it be urged that—“under this view, the Veda would become
unauthoritative,”—our answer is that, that might be so; but when a
certain fact is well established by reason and arguments, it is not
abandoned or rejected for the sake of accomplishing any purpose. In
fact, an argument is set aside only by another and a more cogent
argument.

“But if the Injunction of Vedic Study were taken as serving the same
purpose as that of ‘becoming a Teacher,’ then the former would lose its
injunctive character; as in that case no significance would attach to
what is expressed by its own words.”

The same thing happens also when the Injunction in question is made a
part and parcel of the Injunction of the Jyotiṣṭoma, etc.

If, on the other hand, the Injunction of Vedic Study is regarded as
independently by itself conducive to the carrying into effect of what it
enjoins, then, standing upon an equal footing with all other
Injunctions, it rightly comes to be acted up to by itself, as a
necessary factor (of all performances).

Thus then, out of the several alternative options—some heavier than the
rest—that have been set forth (in the verse), if the lighter alternative
serves to accomplish the desired purpose, all that the undertaking of
the heavier option can do is to add something to the quality of what has
been prescribed by the Injunction. Just as is the case with the options
of giving ‘one, three or twelve cows’ as a fee in connection with the
Laying of Fire. Thus then, if the Injunction of Study has been carried
into effect on its own accouut (and the Veda has been studied), we
cannot escape from its twofold relation—*viz*.: (1) its leading to the
performance of what it itself prescribes, and (2) its helping the
performance of the Jyotiṣṭoma and other acts; it matters little whether
such relation is directly stated, or implied, or assumed; for this
latter fact would involve a diversity only in the means whereby the
knowledge of the relation is obtained, and not any in the relation
itself.

“How is it that you are making statements, of which the succeeding ones
are inconsistent with the preceding ones? It has been asserted above
that Injunctions of sanctification are never directly related to
results; while now it is stated that the Injunction in question is by
itself conducive to itself being carried into effect. It might be urged
that—‘Though it is true that the Injunction of Sanctification is not
related to any directly mentioned result, yet there is nothing
incompatible in its being related to such results as are indirectly
indicated.’ But even this makes no difference, if the performanceof the
act (of Study), as prompted by the injunction in question, is made to
extend to the comprehension of meaning also. Even so, the mere learning
of the Text being got at in accordance with the Injunction of ‘having
recourse to a teacher &c.,’ it would become admitted that Injunctions of
sanctification are related to definite results. If, on the other hand,
the performance of the act (of study) were in accordance with the
Injunction as helping other Injunctions (*i.e*., those of the Jyotiṣṭoma
and other acts), then, in that case, it would come to this that the Veda
would be studied by one seeking after the stated result, and not that
the person who has studied the Veda is entitled to the performance of
acts leading to that result; and in that case, the Shudra’s title could
not be denied. Nor does it necessarily follow that the meaning of Vedic
texts should be learnt immediately after the texts have been learnt. In
fact, whenever one might, by chance, come to understand that ‘a certain
Vedic act, named Jyotiṣṭoma, leads to Heaven,’ he would learn the
details of the procedure of that act, and at that same time he would
also read up such Vedic texts related to that act as would have to be
recited by the sacrificer.”

To the above, some people make the following answer, on the basis of the
principle enunciated in Pūrva-Mīmāṃsā—Sutra 4.1. 18 *et. seq*. The
*Sviṣṭakṛt* and other similar offerings have been regarded as being of
both kinds, serving the purposes of sanctification and also leading to
specific results; and, on the same analogy, ‘Vedic Study’ also would be
of both kinds—being purely sanctificatory, as indicated by the words of
the Injunction prescribing it, and also leading to particular results,
by virtue of its bringing about the comprehension of the meaning of
texts which ultimately leads to the performance of acts (directly
bringing about those results). It is in this manner that the Injunction
of Vedic Study becomes conducive to definite results.

“But who is the person to whom the results accrue (and who, by seeking
for that result, comes to perform the act)?”

Our answer is that it is the Boy belonging to one of the three higher
castes, who has gone through the Initiatory Rite. That this is so is
clear from the fact that the act (of Vedic Study) has been prescribed
among the duties of the Religious Student. The Injunctive and other
similar affixes are expressive of that injunction or persuasion which is
inseparable from the person sought to be persuaded; and when the
question arises as to particular details regarding that person, (*a*)
sometimes the information is supplied by the words of the Injunction
itself—*e.g*., in the sentence ‘one desiring heaven should perform the
Agnihotra throughout his life (*b*) sometimes, even though not directly
mentioned, he comes to be assumed on the basis of what is directly
stated;—*e.g*., in the case of the *Viśvajit* and other
sacrifices;—(*c*) sometimes, again, he is indicated by the examination
of other Injunctions in view of the force of the context and the nature
of things. In the present case, all this is present:—(*a*) the Religious
Student happens to be the person dealt with in the context (in which the
injunction of Vedic Study occurs); (*b*) the comprehension comes about
from the nature of things; and (*c*) the Study is of use in connection
with all other Injunctions, as it is only one who has learnt the Veda
that is entitled to the performance of any Vedic act.

This explanation is not accepted by others. \[According to these\] it is
in the character of the ‘Injunction of Santcification’ itself that the
Injunction in question has (he corres-pondiṇg result indicated. As a
matter of fact, all sanctificatory acts are done for the sake of the
thing sought to be sanctified; and if no peculiarity is perceived in
that object, then the act would lose its very character of
‘sanctification,’ as it happens in the case of the ‘*Saktu*.’ In the
case in question, however, there does appear a peculiarity in the shape
of the comprehension of acts conducive to definite results. The case of
the ‘*Sviṣṭakṛt*’ offering has been cited above; but in that case the
two-fold character has to be admitted, as if both were not held to be
denoted by the root and the affix, then the act (of ‘sacrifice’) would
cease to be itself.

From all this it follows that the Injunction in question stands by
itself, and pertains to the initiated boy; and hence the act (of
‘study’) has to be done fo r its own sake, and not as subserving, like
the *threshing* of corn, the purpose of results proceeding from the
performance of the *Darśa-pūrṇamāsa* and other sacrifices.

The same should be understood to be the case with the learning of more
than one Veda; In connection with this also, the question might arise as
to why one should learn several Vedas, when the Injunction is duly
fulfilled by the learning of one Veda only? And here also the answer
would be that the learning of several Vedas would be conducive to large
results. The result of such learning also would be of the nature
described above, and not of the nature ‘milk,’ ‘curd,’ and the like.
Such being the case, if one has learnt a single Veda, when he comes to
undertake the performance of acts requiring the use of mantras not
occurring in the particular Vedic Rescension learnt by him, the very
force of circumstances permits his learning of those Mantras; though in
describing the title to the performance of Vedic acts, as belonging to
‘persons who have learnt the Veda,’ the qualification mentioned is that
he should have *duly learnt* the Veda. \[But the peculiar circumstances
of the case render it permissible for the performer to leam the mantras
at the time\].

Others have held that in the text—‘that the Veda with its six subsidiary
sciences should be learnt is what should be done by the Brāhmaṇa without
any other motive,’—the phrase ‘without any other motive’ explains the
nature of the act as regards the person to perform it; the term ‘without
any motive’ means ‘without having any other end in view;’ so that what
is meant is that the act should be done as a compulsory one. Unless we
take this term as indicating the nature of the person to perform it, it
cannot be construed with the rest of the sentence either in the form of
an act, or in that of an agency contributing towards the act, or in that
of a qualification of the act, and so forth.

Thus, then, even though the Injunction in question be one of
sanctification, yet it may have its result indicated indirectly (as
explained before), or stated directly (as now explained); and neither of
this involves any incongruity.

Others, again, argue that since it is an Injunction of sanctification,
it is better to take it as not related to any result at all. For the
result is sought after only for endowing the act with a certain
peculiarity; and this peculiarity in the present case is obtained by
noting the thing to be sanctified. It is true that Injunctions of
sanctification stand in need of the mention of purposes served by them;
but all that is sought to be accomplished by an injunction is the result
of the act enjoined; and such result, in the present case, is actually
found to consist in the ‘getting up’ of the text; and there is nothing
incongruous in this.

The present verse not specifying the period for the learning of each
Veda, we derive the knowledge of the specific period from other
Smṛti-texts, which lay down that the studentship relating to each Veda
is to extend over twelve years.

The next question that arises is—which are the ‘three Vedas’ that are
meant here?

They are the Ṛgveda, the Yajurveda and the Sāmaveda.

“Then, is the *Atharvan* not a Veda at all?”

Who says so? All that is meant by the present context is a certain
sanctification; and when the sanctification in question is found to be
one that can be accomplished by taking the words of the present verse in
their literal sense, the Injunction in question has its performance
secured by being extended up to the comprehension of meaning; and this
for the simple reason that the said comprehension is of use in all
performances. As for the Atharvan Veda, it deals for the most part with
magical spells, and hence neither the *Jyotiṣṭoma* and other such acts,
nor any details pertaining to these, are prescribed in it; in fact, all
the duties relative to the *Hotṛ* the *Adhvaryu* and the *Udgātṛ* are
completely laid down in the Three Vedas; the duties of the
Brahman-priest also are laid down in the Three Vedas. Then, again, the
term ‘three’ denotes a special number, and whenever a particular numeral
is used, it is always with reference to a particular character (in which
the things included under that number are found to agree). So that, in
the case in question, those alone can be taken as included under the
number ‘three’ which are found to possess the common character of
containing Injunctions regarding what ought to be done. And the Atharvan
does not fall within this category; as it does not contain any
injunctions of such, primary acts as the Jyotiṣṭoma and the rest, not of
any of their subsidiaries. As regards the *Śyena* and other malevolent
sacrifices, these also are performed by the same priests (as the
*Jyotiṣṭoma*, &c.), and their procedure also is the same, with a few
additional details; but even those peculiar details are such as have
been prescribed in the Three Vedas. Thus, theu, since the Atharvan Veda
is\|not found, in the performance of any act, to be grouped either With
Ṛk and Yajus, or with Ṛk and Sāman, it cannot be included under the
appellation of ‘Three Vedas and this is the reason why it has not been
mentioned in the present context But, since it is included under the
term ‘*svādhyāya*,’ ‘*veda*,’ there is nothing incongruous in its being
included under the wider Injunction of ‘Vedic Study.’

‘*For half that period*’—‘*that period*’ refers to ‘thirty six years;’
the ‘half’ of which is eighteen years. Here also the division of time
would be six years for each Veda.

‘*Or for a quarter*;’—‘Quarter’ is the fourth part of the said number,
*i.e*., nine years, that is, three years for each of the three Vedas.

“But how can the Veda be got up in three years.”

It is quite possible that a certain pupil may be exceptionally
intelligent (and he could get up the Veda in three years).

Other people offer the following explanation:—The duties prescribed in
the verse are not made conditional upon the character of the ‘learning
they are conditioned by the injunction bearing upon the duties
themselves. So that if, before the learning has been accomplished, the
rules are duly observed for a few days during the course of learning,
the purpose of the Injunction becomes duly fulfilled; as the observance
of the details even to that extent would go to fulfil the conditions of
the Injunction of Vedic Study. If one puts an end to his observances
before he has got up the text, then he comes to be called a
‘*Vratasnātaka*’ ‘renouncer of observances.’ Thus, inasmuch as both
these contingencies are possible, it is only right that a definite
period of time should have been prescribed; and the meaning is that one
does not become entitled tō the title of ‘*Vratasnātaka*’ unless he has
put in *three years*’ work (at least). Though some *Smṛtis* lay down
that ‘there is Final Bath only on the completion of Vedic Study,’ yet it
is quite reasonable to apply the name ‘Bath’ (*snāna*) figuratively to
the completion of the observances relative to Vedic Study.

This, however, is not right. Though the observances are objects of
independent Injunctions, yet the right course to be adopted is that they
should be kept up as long as the ‘study’ continues. In fact, the
observances having been actually enjoined in connection with Study, they
must continue throughout the study. If the first part of the present
verse (consisting of the first three feet) were taken separately, then
the words of the text themselves would make the observances abandoned
after three years only, even before the ‘study’ has been finished. If,
on the other hand, the whole verse—including the last quarter—is taken
as a single sentence, then the observances cannot cease until the Veda
has been wholly learnt. In fact, the particle ‘*eva*,’ ‘precisely,’
clearly indicates that this last view is the correct one.

“If there is no cessation of the observances until the Vedas have been
learnt, how is it that three are two distinct titles (l)
‘*Vratasnātaka*’, ‘who has completed the observances.’ and (2)
*Vedasnātaka*,’ ‘who has completed the Veda’?”

We shall explain this under Discourse IV.

The aggregate of ‘thirty-six years’ is called ‘*ṣaṭtṛṃśadabdam*;’ that
which pertains to this aggregate is ‘*ṣaṭtṛṃśadābdikam*’. Similarly, the
term ‘*traivedikam*.’ That whose extent is half of that is
‘*tadardhikam*.’ Similarly, ‘*pādikam*’ and ‘*grahaṇāntikam*.’ The
possessive affix in these terms is in accordance with Pāṇini’s Sūtra
5.2.145. The forms cannot come under Pāṇini’s 5.1.57.—(1).


