+++
title = "002 वेदान् अधीत्य"

+++
The ‘learning of Three Vedas’ has been mentioned (in the preceding
verse); the learning of ‘two’ and ‘one’ Veda, not having been mentioned
anywhere, are here put forward us alternatives. The term ‘*veda*’ in
this connection has been explained as standing for Recensional Text;
‘and what is meant is that one should learn three, or two, or one
Recension of each of the three Vedas,—and not that three or two or one
Recension of a single Veda should be learnt. Because the work to be
learnt has been called the ‘Triplicate Science.’

‘*Having learnt*’—having got up, by means of the above described course
of studentship.

‘*He should enter upon the state of the householder*’—The exact nature
of;the ‘Householder’s stage’ is going to be described later on (Verse 4,
below).—‘*Enter*,’ *i.e*., live; verbal roots having several meanings.
The prefix ‘ā’ denotes limit.

One who has taken a wife to himself is called ‘householder,’ which term
is used in its conventional, not etymological, sense; The term ‘house’
standing for *wife*; and he who *takes his stand upon that house* is
called ‘Householder.’

The term ‘*āśrama*,’ ‘*state*,’ stands for all those duties, positive
and negative, that have been prescribed (for the married man). Just as
for the ‘initiated boy,’ there is ‘state of studentship’ till the Final
Return from the Preceptor’s house, so for one who has married, it is the
‘state of the Householder,’

‘*Nor deviated from the votes of studentship*,’—*i.e*., he who has not
broken the vows of not having intercourse with women. This epithet has
to be regarded as a distinct sentence, in accordance with the usage of
stories; the sense being that (*a*) ‘the boy should not deviate from the
vows of studentship’ and (*b*) ‘he should enter upon the state of the
Householder.’ If the whole were taken as a single sentence, then, as a
result of this, one who has deviated from the vows would never be
entitled at all to enter upon the Householder’s state. If, however, we
take the epithet as an independent injunction pat forth for the man’s
benefit (and not as a necessary condition for entering upon
Householdership), then deviation from it makes the man liable to the
penalty of expiation, but it does not make him unfit to enter upon
Householdership.

By the words, ‘*having learnt, he should enter*,’ all that is meant is
that the two acts should come in this order,—entrance upon
Householdership following the ‘learning;’ and it is not meant that
marriage should come immediately after study. Because where the words
signify mere sequence, immediate sequence is not always meant. Hence
daring the time intervening between ‘Vedic Study’ and ‘marriage,’ it
becomes possible for the boy to carry on the study of Grammar and. other
Sciences, which help in the understanding of the meaning of Vedic texts.
In fact, it is only the learned man that is entitled to Householdership;
and it is not like the ‘Vedic Study,’ to which the entirely ignorant boy
is entitled. Though during boyhood, the boy is like a lower animal,
incapable of understanding what he is entitled to, yet he is made to act
either by his Father or by his Preceptor. In fact, the act of ‘Vedic
Study’ by the boy falls within the Father’s province; the
proper-teaching of the child being the Father’s duty; and the reason for
this lies in the fact that it is only when the child has been properly
taught that the Father is regarded as having duly fulfilled the
injunction of ‘begetting a child.’ ‘Teaching’ of the child, again,
consists in explaining to him what he should do and what he should not
do. And, if the Boy fails to understand his duties when these are
explained to him, he is led by the hand, like the blind man, and made to
fulfil them; just as he is caught firmly by the hand and saved from
falling into the fire or into the well, in the same manner, he is also
saved from drinking and other evils leading to imperceptible effects.
Or, again, just as a boy is made, against his wish, to drink a wholesome
medicine, so in the same manner, he is also made to do acts prescribed
in the scriptures. After he has become capable of understanding things a
little, he is directed by means of such words ‘you should do such and
such an act.’ Such being the case, when the Boy has learnt the Veda, he
should be instructed by his Father or Preceptor in such words as—‘You
have learnt the Veda, now you are fit for carrying on an investigation
into what is contained in it,—hence you should now hear lectures on the
subsidiary sciences.’ It is only when this advice has been given that
the father is regarded as having fulfilled the duty of ‘begetting a
child’; as it has been declared—‘the child is begotten only when he
comes to understand his own duties.’

From all this it becomes established that one should not marry
immediately after learning the Veda, until he has learnt what is
contained in the Veda; and the words of the text have to be construed
thus—‘Having learnt—*i.e*., after learning has been finished—one should
continue to be firm in the vows of studentship (*i.e*., ‘of
continence’). The cessation of continence having become permissible
(after the Veda has been learnt), its maintenance is reiterated with a
view to indicate that the other vows and restraints—such as the
avoidance of honey, meat and the rest—may be withdrawn. The conclusion
thus comes to be that, so long as the Veda is being learnt, the Boy
should keep all his vows of studentship,—but when the learning of the
Veda has been completed, and he continues his studies further for under
standing what is contained in the Veda, he should abstain only from
intercourse with women.

Though the term ‘*brahmacharya*,’ ‘*vows of studentship*,’ is ordinarily
explained as standing for those observances and restraints that are kept
up for the proper learning of the Veda,—yet in the present context it
has been used in the sense of ‘avoiding intercourse with women,’—as we
shall show later on.

‘*In due course*,’—*i.e*., according to that order of reading which is
well known among students; *i.e*. first of all one should read the
sixty-four sections of the Saṃhitā (of the Ṛgveda), then the Brāhmaṇa,
and so forth, in the same order of sequence in which they may have been
studied by his forefathers. In matters like this, no one can rightly say
that ‘one should not follow either family traditions, or the dictates of
morality, or orderly sequence.’ The meaning of all this is that ‘one
should not abandon that Recensional Text which may have been learnt by
his father and other ancestors.’—(2)


