+++
title = "003 हरम् पितुः"

+++
‘*When he has acquired the Veda and his heritage, the father shall
honour him first with the cow*,’ He who has acquired both, the Veda
(‘*Brahman*’) and the heritage (‘*dāya*’) is called
‘*brahmadāyādāharaḥ*.’ ‘*Dāya*’ (Heritage) is *what is given*, *i.e*.,
*property*;—‘*Brahman*’ is ‘*Veda*’;—‘*haraṇa*’ is *acquiring*. It is
only when the boy has learnt the Veda and received his share of the
ancestral property from his father that he takes to the Householder’s
state; a man without any property not being entitled to enter upon that
stage. If the father happens to have no property, he should earn wealth
by begging for the avowed purpose of marrying his son (and thereby
maintaining his line), and then marry him.

Others explain the *Veda* itself as being the ‘heritage;’ and regard the
present verse as a reiteration of the foregoing Injunction! for the
purpose of indicating that it is to be learnt from the Father.

“It having been declared before that it is the Preceptor whose function
it is to teach the Veda, why is it that the boy is now spoken of as
acquiring the Veda and ‘heritage’ *from his father?*”

The answer to this is as follows:—For him whose Father is living, the
Father himself is the ‘Preceptor.’ It is only when the Father is not
living, or when he is somehow incapacitated, that another person may act
as the ‘Preceptor.’ By the appointing of another man as the ‘Preceptor,’
the Father’s title to act as one ceases. But, whether the Father himself
teaches his son or some one else teaches him, it makes no difference.

Some people have urged the following argument—“In connection with the
Upanayana, it has been laid down, as a compulsory duty that the ‘gift
should consist of some very superior thing’ (Gautama, 25.6); from which
it is dear that the function is to be performed by some one else (and
not by the Father himself).”

This is not right. That the Fee should consist of a very superior thing
is an Injunction in connection with the Upanayana, the Initiatory Rite;
and whether the Initiator is the Father or some other Preceptor, neither
of these persons requires any incentive to perform this function; and
fees are paid only as incentives to service; nor is any incentive
necessary in a case where the person engages in the work under the
influence of some other form of prompting. For these reasons, the term
‘Fee’ in the context in question, being found incapable of conveying the
sense of *an incentive to work*, must be taken as standing for some such
gift as is made for the purpose of some transcendental results, just
like the giving of gold. And it is the Father who should make the Boy
the owner of enough wealth to enable him to make a gift of the ‘superior
thing.’

If one were to insist upon the following argument—“it is not possible
for the term *fee* to be used in any sense other than what is paid as an
incentive to serve, and so long as a word can be taken in its primary
sense, it cannot be right to have recourse to any secondary
signification,”—then, in that case, the said Injunction of the Fee will
have to be regarded as applying to such cases where, as in the case of
Satyakāma Jābāla, neither the Father is alive, nor is there any other
Preceptor appointed as the Father’s substitute, and where the Boy
presents himself (to a Teacher) for Initiation. And it has been already
explained that such a boy, having passed his childhood, is fully
entitled to have his sacraments performed for himself.

Thus, in both cases, it is the Father’s function; he may do the
initiating himself or get it done by another Preceptor.

‘*Inclined*’—*i.e*., who is inclined towards entering the life of the
Householder,—and not him who is going to be a lifelong student, even
though the latter may be returning home simply for the sake of obeying
the rule regarding the completion of study.

‘*Adorned with garland*’—this is meant to include all the details that
have been laid down by the authors of the *Gṛhyasūtras* in connection
with the ‘*Madhuparka*’ offering.

‘*Seated upon a couch*’—seated upon a valuable sofa.

‘*With the cow*’—*i.e*., with the ‘*Madhuparka*’ offering. The offering
of the cow in the ‘*Madhuparka*’ has been prescribed as an optional
alternative; hence the term ‘cow’ here stands for that particular act
(of *offering*) which is done by means of the cow.

‘*Shall honour*’—this is the duty of the Father or the Preceptor.

‘*First*’—*i.e*., before marriage.

‘*Inclined*’—*i.e*., lying down upon the couch for the purpose of
receiving the offering.

‘*By* *the strict* *observance of his duties*’—this is a super-fluous
reiteration; and it makes no difference whether it is construed with
‘acquiring the Veda and his heritage,’ or with ‘shall honour.’—(3).


