+++
title = "004 गुरुणानुमतः स्नात्वा"

+++
Even on the completion of the observances relating to Vedic Study, the
Boy shall “bathe” only when ‘*permitted by the Preceptor*.’ ‘*Bathing*’
here stands for a peculiar sacrament prescribed in the *Gṛhyasūtras*, as
the limit for the observances of the Religious Student. Why the term
‘bathing’ is used in this figurative sense we have already explained
above.

‘*Having returned*’—*i.e*., having gone through a particular
consecratory. rite consisting of the offering of the *Madhuparka*, etc.,
as laid down in the *Gṛhyasūtra*, and having returned from the
Preceptor’s home to his Father’s home.

All this has been mentioned as supplementary to the Injunction contained
in the term ‘*shall take*,’ being already known from other sources. The
‘return’ spoken of here is not a part of the ‘marriage.’ Hence for him
who has learnt the Veda in his Father’s house, though there can be no
‘Return,’ yet marriage is done.

Some people take the ‘Return’ to mean that Bath which forms part of the
marriage rites. Against this view it might be argued that the
participial ending ‘*ktvā*’ (in ‘*snātvā*’) clearly indicates that the
two (Bath and Return) are entirely different. But that ceremony of
‘Return’ which coṇsists in ‘bathing’ and which forms part of the
marriage rite, is going to be described later; where a particular form
of ‘Bathing’ with its details is found laid down, \[Hence the ‘Return’
mentioned, in the present verse cannot be regarded as part of
Marriage.\]

Or, the term ‘*Return*’ may be taken as intended to connote *the
renouncing of restraints and observances*. In that case, ‘*returned*’
would mean ‘having resumed the former condition free from all
restraint.’ Special stress is laid upon the *renouncing of restraints*
in this connection, because the observances and restraints imposed upon
the Religious Student are exceptionally hard, which is not the case with
the other subsequent stages of life.

‘*According to rule*’—this is to be construed like the term ‘in strict
accordance with his duties’ (of the preceding verse).

‘*The twice-born person shall take a wife*’—‘Shall take’ constitutes the
injunction of marriage. Marriage is a sacramental rite, a refining
process, as is indicated by the Accusative ending in ‘*bhāryām*.’

“But before marriage there does not exist such a thing as *wife* for
whom the refinement could be effected in the same manner as
ornamentation by collyrium is done to the Eye. In fact, it is by means
of marriage itself that the *wife* is brought into existence.”

In the case of the sacrificial post, we find such injunctions as the
‘sacrificial post shall be cut,’ and that same piece of wood becomes the
*post* on which the refining process of *cutting*, &c., has been
performed. Exactly in the same manner it is by means of the refining
process of marriage performed upon her that the person becomes a ‘wife.’

The word ‘marriage’ denotes the *taking hold of the hand*, which forms
the principal factor in the ceremony. To this effect we have the
assertion—‘marriage is taking a wife, *i.e*., the taking hold of the
hand;’ and in this work also marriage is spoken of as ‘the sacrament of
taking hold of the hand’ (verse 43 below). The offering of parched grain
and such other rites are the subsidiary details (of Marriage); and all
this may be learnt from the *Gṛhyasūtras*,

Later on (in verse 8) we read—‘one shall not marry a *maiden* with
golden hair, &e., &c.;’—and from the use of the term ‘maiden’ there it
is clear that marriage is a sacrament for maidens, and not for any and
every woman; and we are going to explain later on that in the present
context the term ‘maiden’ stands for *the female who has had no
intercourse with a male*.

‘*Of the same caste as himself*’—*i.e*., belonging to the same caste.

‘*Endowed with signs*,’—The term ‘*signs*’ stands for the colour of the
complexion, lines on the body, moles and such other marks which are
indicative of unwidowed life, offspring, wealth, and so forth,—which may
be learnt from the science of Astrology.—‘*Endowed’—i.e*.,
equipped—‘with these signs;’ *i.e*., bearing auspicious marks. Even
though indicators of evil are also called ‘signs,’ yet since what is
mentioned here is, that one should marry a girl with these signs, it
follows that what is meant is the girl with good, auspicious, signs. In
fact, the term, ‘*lakṣaṇa*,’ ‘sign,’ is used in ordinary parlance in the
sense of desirable signs; *e.g*., men and women are spoken of as
‘endowed with signs’ which means that they bear auspicious marks.

What we have to consider in this connection is the question of *title*
(Who is entitled to marry?).

Since the Injunction of marriage enjoins a sacrament, a consecration, it
comes to be performed just like the Laying of Fire; and just as the
Laying of Fire serves, through the *Āhavanīya* and other fires, the
purposes of compulsory and voluntary acts, and hence it comes to be
performed for the bringing into existence of the *Āhavanīya*, &c., as
subsidiary to those acts,—so the Marriage also brings into existence the
‘Wife,’ and through her serves the fulfilment of the visible and
unvisible ends of man. For example, when desire for sexual intercourse
arises in man, there arises the possibility of his having recourse to
any and every woman; but intercourse with maidens and wives of other men
being prohibited, the said desire comes to be accomplished only through
one’s own married wife \[The married wife thus serves a visible end\].
Then again, there is the saying that ‘every religious act shall be done
by the husband and wife together,’ which shows that it is only as
accompanied by his wife that man is entitled to the performance of
religious acts; and thus it is clear that the accomplishment of the
invisible (transcendental) purposes of man also is dependent upon the
wife.

In connection with this subject, some people make the following
observations:—“As just described, persons, with their sexual desire
aroused, have, of their own accord, their marriages done for the purpose
of accomplishing their visible ends; and after they have married, they
happen to perform certain religious acts; and in this case, the marriage
might thus turn out to be of use in the fulfilment of religious acts.
But in a case where a man’s desire for intercourse with women has
entirely ceased, there is no marriage at all;—there being no marriage,
the man is not entitled to the performance of religious acts;—in the
absence of such title, the non-performance of acts shall involve no
sin;—consequently, there need be nothing reprehensible in the conduct of
the man who does not take to the Householder’s life and does not perform
any religious acts conducive to the ends of man.”

This, however, is not right. Religious acts are as much conducive to the
fulfilment of man’s purpose as sexual desire is. In fact, every man
engages in activity only for the accomplishment of some purpose of his.
If this were not so (*i.e*., the entrance into the Householder’s state
were not essential), then there would be no room for such assertions as
‘desisting for a year from entering into the Householder’s state, &c.,
&c.’ *We* shall explain this fully under Discourse VI, in connection
with the question of option regarding the Life-stages.—(4)


