+++
title = "005 असपिण्डा च"

+++
The text proceeds to show what sort of maiden should be married.

‘*She who is not a sapiṇḍa of one’s mother*, *and who is not of the same
gotra as his Father, has been recommended for marriage*.’ The term
‘*sapiṇḍa*’ indicates the relations on the mother’s side. According to
another Smṛti, women are called the “mother’s sapiṇḍa” only up to three
steps of relationship. But, as a matter of fact, marriage with relatives
on the mother’s side is permitted beyond not the *third*, but the
*fifth*, step of relationship. Says Gautama (4—3 and 5)—‘Beyond the
seventh step of relationship on the Father’s side and beyond the fifth
step on the mother’s side.’ Thus, inasmuch as the term ‘*sapiṇḍa*’
cannot be taken here in its literal sense (of relation within *three*
steps of relationship), it has to be explained, in accordance with other
*Smṛtis* (such as Gautama), as standing for ‘mother’s relation.’ The
meaning thus comes to be—‘She who is not born of the mother’s family;’
and the limit of *relationship* is to be taken as prescribed by Gautama.
So that one should not marry the girl who is descended either from his
maternal grandfather or great-grandfather, up to five steps downwards,
on account of the closeness of relationship among the descendants of
these. Hence the mother’s sister, the daughter of the mother’s sister,
as also those descended from the maternal great-grandmother, all these
become excluded, on the ground of all of them being ‘relations.’

‘*She who is not of the same gotra as his Father*—The term ‘*gotra*’ has
been declared to stand for the descendants of

Vaśiṣṭha, Bhṛgu, Garga and the rest.—‘*Of the same gotra*’ means
*belonging to same gotra*. That is, a ‘Vaśiṣṭha’ girl cannot be married
by a ‘Vaśiṣṭha’ boy; nor the ‘Garga’ girl by a ‘Garga’ boy.

In the *Vaśiṣṭha* (Dharmaśāstra), there is prohibition also of the girl
belonging to the same *gotra* as one’s mother. It says—‘If the
twice-born person marries a girl of the same *gotra* or the same
*Pravara* as himself, he shall renounce her and perform the penance of
the Cāndrāyaṇa; so also if he has married the daughter of his maternal
uncle, or a girl of the same *gotra* as his mother.’

Gautama says—‘There is marriage between parties not having the same
*Pravara*’ (4.2); so that if the *Pravara* is different, there may be
marriage, even though the *gotra* happen to be the same.

This, however, is not right; because another Smṛti (Yājñavalkya) has
prohibited both—‘one should marry a girl born of a *different gotra and
Ṛṣi*’ (Acāra, 53),—where ‘*Ṛṣi*’ stands for ‘pravara.’

“But how can a girl be born of the same *Ṛṣis* when her *gotra* is
different?”

Why may this not be possible when the *Smṛti* distinctly speaks of it?
This subject is one that falls entirely within the purview of *Śruti and
Smṛti*, and is beyond our perception; so that there could be no
incongruity (in what is directly asserted in the *Smṛti*).

“What are ‘*pravaras*,’ after all?”

Well, you are asking too little; you might as well ask—‘What is a
Brāhmaṇa?’ ‘What is a gotra?’ In fact, just as the generic character of
‘man’ being equally present in all men, the ‘Brāhmaṇa’ and the rest
constitute the particular species included under that generic
character,—exactly in the same manner, the generic character of
‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ being common among a number of men, ‘*Vaśiṣṭha*’ and the
rest come in as specific sub-divisions; and related to each ‘*gotra*’
there are a few names of ‘*Ṛṣis*;’ and the person who belongs to a
certain ‘*gotra*’ has to connect himself with these Ṛṣi-names, which are
called his ‘*pravara*.’ This same is the meaning of the term ‘*pravara*’
in connection with the prohibition of marriage.

The writers of Sūtras have mentioned the *pravaras* along with each
distinct *gotra*, in such words as—‘such and such are the *pravaras* of
the person belonging to such and such a *gotra*.’ As for the distinct
*gotras*, these are duly remembered by the persons born in those
*gotras* themselves—‘we belong to the ‘*Parāśara-gotra*,’ ‘we belong to
the *Upamanyu-gotra*,’ and so forth. Though, like.their *gotra*, people
remember their *pravaras* also, yet inasmuch as the number of *pravaras*
is large, it was thought that people might forget them, and hence the
Smṛtis were written for the purpose of mentioning the *pravaras*
connected with each of the *gotras*. As for the *gotra*, save that
people themselves remember it, there is no other indicative in the form
that ‘he who is like this and that belongs to such and such a *gotra*.
All that has been declared in connection with *gotra* is that persons
belonging to the same *gotra* must belong to a common stock and a common
caste.

This diversity of *Gotra* and *Pravara* is found only among Brāhmaṇas,
not Kṣatriyas and Vaiśyas. Say the authors of the *Kalpasūtra*—‘that of
the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya is determined by that of their priests.’ On
the ground of this Kalpasūtra-statement occurring in the section dealing
with *Pravara*, it might be construed to be a denial of *pravara* only,
which might be understood to apply to those two castes also by reason of
particular *gotras* having been mentioned in relation to them. But, in
reality, there are no *gotras* mentioned in connection with them.

“Under the circumstances, what sort of restriction would there be on the
point of relationship, in connection with marriages?”

Our answer is as follows:—The rule of Gautama (4. 3), that ‘it should be
beyond the seventh step among the relations on the father’s side,’ is
common to all castes (and this would supply the necessary limitation).

In the present verse also the term ‘*not of the same gotra*’ means ‘who
is not a *Sapiṇḍa*;’ and, just as the term ‘*sapiṇda*,’ in the preceding
phrase, so the same term here also, would be taken as standing for
‘relations;’ and in this way we secure the exclusion of girls descended
from the father’s sister, as also of other girls descended from one’s
great-grandfather, up to the seventh step. And it is only persons up to
the seventh step of relationship that have been called ‘*sapiṇḍa*.’

Others have explained ‘*gotra*’ to mean *family*. And in this case,
there is no need for any limit; there can be no marriage among parties
who know each other as ‘belonging to the same family.’ In accordance
with this view also the term ‘*asapiṇḍā*’ has to be construed twice
over; so that, as before, the daughter of the father’s sister and Others
become excluded.

“But, according to this view, the exclusion of girls belonging to the
same *gotra* and having the same *pravaras* becomes difficult. As among
these there is no such idea as that ‘we belong to the same family.’”

The answer to the above is that this difficulty is sought to be
explained by a reference to tradition. There is a tradition that
‘Vaśiṣṭha and others like him are the prime progenitors of families, and
persons descended from them and belonging to their *gotra* are the
*Pravaras*, who were their sons and grandsons endowed with excellent
austerities and learning and vastly famous.’ \[ And in this sense
‘persons belonging to the same *gotra* and having the same *pravaras*’
may be regarded as ‘belonging to the same family.’\] In other *Smṛtis*
also we find the same rule.

The following facts, however, have to be borne in mind in this
connection:—In the phrase, ‘having the same *pravaras*,’ the *sameness*
is in regard to the *names*, not the mere *number*, of *Pravaras*; and
the question arises, whether the prohibition applies to all cases where
al the Pravara-names are the same, or only to those where even one name,
happens to be common. If the whole set of names constitutes the
‘*pravara*,’ then there is no ‘sameness of Pravara’ in a case where a
few names are common but others are different, and hence the ‘set of
names’ in the two cases becomes different; so that the prohibition would
not apply to such a case; and marriage could take place between the
*Upamanyus* and the *Parāśaras*, whose *gotras* are different,—one
belonging to the *Gotra* of Upamanyu, and the other to the *gotra* of
Parāśara,—but there is difference in their. ‘*pravaras*,’ in the Sense
noted above; because for the ‘*Upamanyu gotra*’ the *Pravaras* are
‘Vaśiṣṭha, Bharadvāja and Ekapāt,’ while for the ‘*Parāśara gotra*’ they
are ‘Vaśiṣṭhya, Gārgya and Parāśarya.’ If, on the other hand, only one
name constituted the ‘Pravara’—and not the whole set, then the
prohibition would apply to even such cases where a single name happens
to be common. *E.g*., when it is said ‘*Māṣa* grains should not be
eaten,’ one ceases to eat even mixed *Māṣa* grains.

What, then, is the right view?

The right view is that single names constitute ‘*pravara*; it is in
accordance with this that we find such usage as ‘*ekam vṛṇīte*,’ ‘*dvau
vṛnīte*,’ ‘*trīn vṛnīte*,’—where there is co-ordination between ‘one,’
‘two’ and ‘three’ with the ‘*Pravara*;’ and it is said that ‘there
should be no marriage even when, one pravara-name is common.’

The mention of the ‘twice-born person’ is merely indicative; as for the
*Śūdra also* there is no marriage up to seven grades of relationship on
the father’s aide, and five on the mother’s side.

‘*Marriage*’—*i.e*., taking to wife.

‘*Recommended*’—enjoined with commendation.

‘*Who is not born of (unlawful) intercourse*,’ *i.e*., who is born
directly from her lawful father. ‘*Niyoga*’ (begetting of offspring by
the widow) having been permitted, the girl who would be born under that
form would not be excluded by the foregoing qualifications; hence she is
separately excluded by the term ‘*who its not born of unlawful
intercourse*;’ which means that one should not voluntarily marry a girl
born, of ‘Niyoga,’ because she is born of unlawful intercourse.

Others read ‘*Amaithune*’ (for ‘*Amaithunī*), and explain it to mean
that the girl described has been recommended as an associate at
religions functions, and *not for sexual intercourse*.

And such a prohibition would be by way of eulogy; the sense being—‘if
one marries a girl with these qualifications, she fulfills his religious
functions, even though there be no sexual intercourse.’


