+++
title = "010 अव्यङ्गाङ्गीं सौम्य-नाम्नीम्"

+++
One whose body is free from defects is called ‘*avyaṅgāṅgī*;’ the term
‘*avyaṇga*’ standing for *freedom from defects*; just like such other
words as ‘*pravīṇa*,’ ‘*udāra*,’ and the rest. Since the term
‘*avyaṅga*,’ etymologically, means ‘free from defects in the limbs,’ the
second ‘*aṇga*’ must be taken as standing for the *whole body*; hence
the epithet ‘*avyatiya*’ denotes *fulness or comeliness of the bodily
form*.

‘*Saumya*,’ ‘agreeable’—it has been laid down in this book that the
names of women should be sweet-sounding and easy to pronounce.

She who moves like the swan or the elephant. That is, one whose gait is
as elegant and languid as that of the swan or the elephant.

The term ‘*tanu*,’ ‘*fine*,’ here does not stand for ‘*small*;’ it means
moderate. Just as the girl who is neither fat nor leau is called
‘*tanvaṅgī*,’ ‘one with a fine body.’

‘*Mṛdvaṇgī* is one whose limbs are *tender*, not hard or rough.

Such a female ‘*one should marry*.’ ‘*Female*’ here must be taken to
stand for the *maiden*, as it is the maiden that is being spoken of in
the context.

“If that is so (if this verse also refers to the *maiden*), then the
prohibition contained in verse 8 regarding ‘one who has no hair, &c.,’
is superfluous; as the positive injunction, contained in the present
verse, implies that ‘one who is not as here described should not be
married.’”

True, that is so; the same fact when stated by means of two
verses—affirmatively in one and negatively in the other—becomes clearly
understood.

In the present context, the term ‘maiden’ is used in the sense of a
woman who has not experienced sexual intercourse. Says Vaśiṣṭha—‘One
should acquire a wife who has had no sexual intercourse and who is
similar to himself.’ But one who has been ‘consecrated’ (by marriage) by
one man is no longer capable of being ‘consecrated’ by another; as there
can be no doing of what has been already done. So that, if a girl has
been married, and her husband goes away before she has had intercourse
with him,—if she happens to be a loose woman, she cannot be married to
another person, even though she is still a ‘*maiden*’ (in the technical
sense); and it is such a maiden that is mentioned in the words of
Vaśiṣṭha quoted above. In another work also it is said—‘One should marry
a female, never before married by another person, who is younger than
himself and has brothers’ (Yājñavalkya, *Ācāra* 52).—(10)


