+++
title = "011 यस्यास् तु"

+++
She who has no brother,—such a girl one should not marry,—‘*for fear of
her having, the character of the appointed daughter*;’ *i.e*., by reason
of her being an ‘appointed daughter;’ *i.e*., by reason of there being
the doubt that the girl’s father might have performed those rites that
would have made her an ‘appointed daughter.’

“Why should such a doubt arise at all?”

Such a doubt would arise if the girl’s father is not known, having died
or having gone away to a foreign country. Under such circumstances, the
girl is given away in marriage either by her mother or by other members
of her father’s family. Since it is laid down that when the girl has
reached the marriageable age, if her father happen to be absent, she
shall be given away in marriage by the said relations.’ The exact rule
on this point we shall quote later on. If the father is known, however,
there is no fear of the girl being an ‘appointed daughter as he will
himself declare whether or not she has been ‘appointed.’

‘*Or*’ in the text should be taken in the sense of ‘if;’ the sense being
that ‘if the father is not known, the girl should not be married.’

Others have taken the two clauses as formulating two independent
prohibitions: (a) ‘If the father is not known’—*i.e*., if it is not
known from whom she is born; this being a prohibition of marrying the
girl of unknown parentage;—and (*b*) the next prohibition is to be
construed as ‘one should not marry the girl who has no brother, for fear
of her being an appointed daughter.’ They further point out that the
latter phrase, ‘for fear of her being an appointed daughter,’ cannot be
construed with the clause, ‘if her father is not known.’

In the whole of this section on Marriage, wherever the prohibition is
not based upon grounds that are not perceptible—*e.g*., ‘one should
marry a maiden who is not his father’s *sapiṇḍa*,’ etc., (when the
grounds of interdiction are trascendental, not perceptible, as in the
case of the prohibition of marriage with a diseased girl, etc.),—if the
prohibition is disobeyed, the ‘marriage’ itself remains unaccomplished.
Hence, if one happens to marry a girl belonging to the same *gotra* as
himself, the marriage, even though performed, would be as good as *not
performed*; and this for the simple reason that the character of
‘marriage’ is determined by scriptural injunction,—just like the
character of the ‘Fire-laying’ rite; and, hence, a transgression of the
injunction means the non-accomplishment of -the Rite. In the case of
Fire-laying, it is found that if there is omission of any subsidiary
detail, the *Āhavanīya*’ and other ‘Fires’ are not accomplished;
similarly, a girl that belongs to the same ‘*gotra*’ as a man can never
become the ‘wife’ of that man. Hence it has been ordained that such a
girl, even though she may have gone through the sacramental rites, shall
be given up. Further, in connection with such marriages, Vaśiṣṭha and
other revered writers have prescribed specie lexpiratory rites. Even
though, in reality, what each a marriage involves is only a discrepancy
in the Rite caused by the transgression of one of the interdictions
relating to a subsidiary detail,—and it does not involve any sin on the
part of the man,—yet the Expiratory Rite has to be performed, in view of
its being directly enjoined by the scriptures. Or, we may take it thus
that what is prohibited is ‘intercourse’ with a girl of the same
‘*gotra*,’ and the Expiatory Rite relates to the series of acts
perpetrated by the man (in the form of the marriage-ceremonies.)

As regards the prohibition of marriage with girls belonging to families
that may have dropped the sacred rites and so forth,—it is based upon
perceptible grounds; and, hence, when such girls are married, the
‘marriage’ is duly accomplished, the girl actually becomes the man’s
‘wife,’ and she shall not be given up. It is in view of this fact that
in verse 6, we have the laudatory epithet ‘even though they be great,’
which draws a line of distinction between the two sets of prohibitions.
Such also is the custom among all cultured people: they do occasionally
marry girls ‘with tawny hair,’ etc., but never one that belongs to the
same gotra.—(11)


