+++
title = "012 सवर्णाग्रे द्विजातीनाम्"

+++
In verse 4, we had the words ‘the twice-born person should take a wife,’
where the *wife* has been spoken of by means of a word ending in the
Accusative, which makes the *wife* th e *primary*, and the *marriage*
the *secondary*, object; and yet the singular number (in ‘wife’) is
meant to be duly significant; since it forms part of the predicate of
the sentence; just as we have in the case of the assertion, ‘he cuts the
*sacrificial post*.’ In the case of a thing whose character is
determined and known from other sources,—if such a thing happens to be
referred to in connection with the Injunction of some other act, it is
always understood to be referred to exactly in the form in which it has
been known; *e.g*., in the case of the injunction, ‘wash the cup;’ and
this for the simple reason that all ‘references’ are based upon wḥat is
previously known. Thus, in connection with the ‘cups,’ their *number* is
already known from such statements as ‘at the morning-extraction the
Adhvaryu takes up *ten* cups;’ their use also is already known from the
statement, ‘libations are poured with the cups;’ hence, in the
subsequent statement, ‘wash the *cup*,’ no significance is attached to
the singular number in the word ‘cup,’—this statementbeing construed in
connection with what is already known about it. In the present instance,
on the other hand, the thing concerned—the ‘wife’—is one whose character
has not been determined anywhere else; in fact, it is only from the
present text that we derive our knowledge of what the ‘wife’ is: hence,
we understand it exactly as it is here described; so that due
significance is to be attached to the number, just as much as to the
basic noun itself. All this we shall discuss with detailed arguments
under discourse V.

Thus then, due significance being attached to the (singular) number (in
the word ‘wife,’ as used in verse 4),—if one happens to marry a second
time, even though the marriage-rites might be duly performed, she does
not become a ‘wife;’ just as when one *Āhavanīya* is already there, the
second fire, even though duly kindled, does not become ‘*Āhavanīya*.’
But, under certain circumstances, the taking of a second wife is
considered desirable; and it is in connection with this second marriage
that we have the rules propounded in this and the following verses. It
is in view of this that Gautama has said—‘If one’s wife is endowed with
virtue and offspring, one should not take another; in the event of
failure on either of the two points, one may have another.’

‘*Of equal caste*,’—*i.e*., of the same caste.

‘*For the first*,’—first of all; *i.e*., for one who has not taken a
wife from a different caste; ‘*has been recommended*.’

Having married a girl of his own caste, if the man finds that she does
not inspire his love; or if the act of child-begetting is not
fulfilled,—then there comes about the man’s desire for another wife; and
then *these*—going to be mentioned below—‘*are to be regarded as
preferable*’— superior—on the strength of the scriptures.

This, then, is an exception to the rule regarding having only *one*
wife, as also to that of having a wife from one’s own caste.

*Objection*:— “The restriction appears to be upon the taking of a second
wife from one’s own caste; as the plurality (of wives) does not appear
to be sanctioned regarding girls of one’s own caste.”

*Answer*—All that the present text permits is the exceeding of the
number ‘one.’ And, if what is sanctioned is the exceeding of it by means
of marrying a girl of a different caste,—what is there that would
prevent one’s marrying (again) a second girl of his own caste? It is for
this reason that what Gautama has declared applies equally to all—‘if
there is failure in regard to either of the two, one may take another
wife.’ In the following verse also we read, ‘she and *one of his own
caste*,’ where also the second wife from one’s own caste is
permitted.—(12).


