+++
title = "014 न ब्राह्मण-क्षत्रिययोर्"

+++
Even when the Śūdra girl is extremely handsome, and the *Brāhmaṇa* or
*Kṣatriya* bridegroom is in the ‘tenth stage’ of his life,—he should
never marry the Śūdra girl.

On this point, a descriptive phrase is added—‘*under no circumstance
whatsoever*’—*i.e*., in no story at all—‘*has been ordained*’—
described.

‘*In peril*’—Even in the greatest distress.

In the preceding verse, the *Śūdra* wife has been permitted, and here
she is prohibited. Hence there should be option.

“Option is permissible only when there is possibility of the two courses
being adopted at one and the same time, and both courses are equally
sanctioned by scriptural injunctions; and it cannot be permitted when a
course of action is open to one only under the influence of passion,
while it is prohibited by scripture. In the case in question, the taking
of a Śūdra wife is not sanctioned by scripture, it is possible only
under the influence of passion; and all that the foregoing verse means
is that the marriage of a Śūdra girl under the influence of passion is
not entirely prohibited; the prohibition, on the other hand (contained
in the present verse), is purely scriptural. Hence the conclusion is
that the *Śūdra* girl should not be married at all. It is in view of
this that Yājñavalkya (*Ācāra*, 56) has declared.—‘It is said that
twice-born persons may take Śūdra wives; but that is not my opinion.”’

Our answer to the above is as follows:—In all cases, option is admitted
only in view of the likely futility of the injunction (of one or the
other coarse of action). If the *Śūdra-wife* were absolutely prohibited,
then the *Kṣatriya* and *Vaiśya* girls alone would have been mentioned
as permitted (to the Brāhmaṇa) in times of peril; and in that case, the
counter-exception (mentioned in 13), as also the prohibition (contained
in 14), would both be superfluous; as the marrying of the girl of one’s
own caste would have been already secured by the restrictive rule. Thus,
then, since there is a clear incompatibility between the sanction (in
13) and the prohibition (in 14), the two should be regarded as optional
alternatives.

“The presence of an option means that the agent may do what he likes;
and, as the marrying of the Śūdra girl (if one wishes to do so) would be
already secured by the counter-exception (in 13), there would be no need
for putting forward the prohibition (in 14) \[as the not-marrying of the
Śūdra girl is already deduced, from the general rule of marrying within
one’s own caste\].”

But the marrying of the *Śūdra* girl has not been left entirely to the
wish of the agent, in the way in which the marrying of *Kṣatriya* and
*Vaiśya* girls has been; in fact, it has not been permitted, except in
times of very great distress.

From all this the following conclusion appears the right one to
adopt:—The general rule regarding marrying a girl of one’s own caste
having already indicated, by implication, the impropriety of marrying
girls of other castes,—that the Śūdra girl should have been prohibited
again (in 14), already shows that the rule regarding not marrying girls
of other castes is not absolute; and since this rule is not absolute, it
follows that in times of difficulty, or in the event of not finding a
girl of his own caste, while the *Śūdra* girl shall never be married,
those of the other two castes may be married.—(14).


