+++
title = "018 दैव-पित्र्यातिथेयानि तत्-प्रधानानि"

+++
This prohibition pertains to all times.

Even if a Śūdra girl happens to be married, the rites, herein mentioned,
should not be performed in a manner by which she might dominate them.
That is to say, the Śūdra wife is not entitled to participate in the
husband’s religious acts, in the manner in which wives of the three
higher castes arc.

Since she is a ‘wife,’ it might be thought that she is so entitled; and
it is in view of the possibility of such notion being entertained that
we have the present prohibition. The meaning thus is that when one is
going to spend his wealth over some religious act, he need not seek her
consent, in the way he seeks that of his wives of the twice-born castes;
in other cases, however—such as the expenses incurred for seeking
prosperity and obtaining pleasure,—she is not to be disregarded. That
she should be employed, like a servant, during the performance of
*Śrāḍdha*, &c., is not prohibited; *e.g*., there would be no harm if she
were to thresh corn and so forth; but she should not be made to serve
food and do such other acts.

‘*Rites in honour of deities*’ are (1) the *Daśa-pūrnamāsa* and other
sacrifices, and (2) the feeding of Brāhmaṇas in honour of Deities, as
already explained by us under 2.180.

‘*Rites in honour* *of* *Pitṛs*’—*i.e*., Śrāddhas and offering of
water-libations.

‘*Rites in honour of guests*’—*i.e*., the reception and feeding of
guests, and offering them water for washing their feet, and so forth.

“The prohibition here put forth is already implied by the rule that
wives of one’s own caste should not be superseded by other wives.”

Not so; because the rule speaks of the wife of the same caste being
actually present. Hence people might he led. to argue as follows—“If the
wife of the Brāhmaṇa’s own caste happens to be in her courses, or
absent, then his Śūdra wife may preside over the rites, just like his
*Kṣatriya* and *Vaiśya* wives; further, the prohibition contained in the
rule referred to pertains, not to her title to preside, but simply to
the act of examining the clarified butter and so forth, which are done
by the wife in accordance with the rule that the clarified butter used
at sacrifices should be such as has been examined by the wife; and, as
the rule simply mentions the general name ‘wife,’ it may be taken to
mean that the act may be done by any wife that has been obtained.”

And it is with a view to prevent this being done,—and of wives of
different castes doing the said acts in the same way in which they are
done by any one wife from among several wives of the same caste,—that we
have the present prohibition.

The ‘*domination*,’ by the wife is due to her being entitled to the act.

‘*The deities and the Pitṛs do not eat of it*;’—this means that the acts
become futile.

‘*He does not go to heaven*;’—*i.e*., if the guest takes food, the
householder fails to attain Heaven, which he would attain as the result
of his having fed his guests. ‘*Heaven*’ here stands for all those
rewards that have been described as proceeding from the ‘honouring of
guests,’ and it is a reference to all that has been said under 3.
106.—(18).


