+++
title = "025 पञ्चानान् तु"

+++
The law laid down in this verse pertains to the *Kṣatriya* and the rest,
not to the Brāhmaṇa; for if it referred to the latter, there would be an
inconsistency regarding the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ forms; as the Brāhmaṇa can never
do the ‘killing and wounding’ (which are inevitable in that form), which
acts are possible only for the *Kṣatriya* and others.

‘*Of the five*’— Forms of marriage, beginning with the
‘*Prājāpatya*’—three are lawful, and two—*i.e*., the *Paiśāca* and the
*Āsura*—should never be adopted.

Though the ‘*Prājāpatya*’ has not been mentioned in connection with the
*Kṣatriya* and others, yet it is here specially enjoined for them; so
also the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ for the *Vaiśya* and the *Śūdra*. It is the *Āsura*
and the *Paiśāca* that are interdicted.

The conclusion on this point is as follows:—For the Brāhmaṇa there are
six forms of marriage; of these the ‘*Brāhma*’ is the best of all;
inferior to that are the ‘*Daiva*’ and the ‘*Prājāpatya*;’ inferior to
these is the *Ārṣa*, then the ‘*Gāndharva*,’ then the ‘*Āsura*.’

There are some people who regard this verse as pertaining to the
Brāhmaṇa also. According to these, the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ form is permissible
for that Brāhmaṇa who may have adopted the profession of the *Kṣatriya*.
They argue that, even though the Brāhmaṇa may have abandoned his own
functions and taken to those of other castes, if they do some ‘killing
and wounding’ in connection with marriage, he may become liable to the
performance of expiatory rites for doing those acts; but that would not
deprive the ‘Rākṣasa marriage’ of the character of ‘marriage.’

That the ‘*Brāhma*’ is the best form of marriage has been shown by its
results (described in versus 37, *et seq*.). As for the other three,
though they have not been interdicted under any circumstances, yet their
inferiority is deduced from the fact that the results following from
them are of an inferior type. As regards the ‘*Āsura*’ form, since it
has been specifically prescribed for the *Vaiśya* and the *Śūdra*, it
implies the exclusion of the *Brāhmaṇa* and the *Kṣatriya* from it. And
yet we have the distinct injunction of six forms as permitted for the
Brāhmaṇa (in 23 above). From all which it follows that there is option;
but it is an option with the restriction that one is to have recourse to
the second option only in the event of the first option being
impossible. Fur-ther, that an option is intended, is clearly established
by the fact that several forms of marriage are permitted, and yet a
combination of all is impossible; just as, in the case of *Vrīhi* and
*Yava*, we admit an option, because both are sanctioned, and yet they
cannot be combined. Thus, then, when other forms are possible, if one
were to adopt the ‘*Āsura*’ form, its results, in regard to spiritual
merit and the character of the offspring, would be inferior.

As regards the *Kṣatriya*, the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ form is the best; as it had
been enjoined absolutely without any option by all the four verses.
Verse 23 permits four forms for the *Kṣatriya*, which means that the
‘*Āsura*,’ the ‘*Gāndharva*,’ and the ‘*Paiśāca*’ also are permitted;
while those latter have been interdicted by the assertion that the
Rākṣasa alone is for the ‘*Kṣatriya*,’ (24). Hence it follows that these
latter forms are *optional*, not primary. In consideration of the
context, it is clear that the injunction is for the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ form
only. But, since there is no definite exclusion of the ‘*Prājāpatya*’
form, this latter also is equal to the ‘*Rākṣasa*,’ for the *Kṣatriya*.

Similarly, for the *Vaiśya* and the *Śūdra* also, the ‘*Prājāpatya*,’
which has been mentioned as permitted in all cases, is not prohibited.
The ‘*Āsura*’ and the ‘*Paiśāca*’ are both ‘permitted’ and ‘prohibited’
for them; the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ also has been interdicted by the phrase,
‘*excepting the Rākṣasa*’ (23), while it is permitted by the assertion
that ‘three are lawful’ (25).

It is for the *Brāhmaṇa* only that the ‘*Paiśāca*’ is not permitted, and
for the *Kṣatriya* and the rest, the ‘*Brāhma*,’ the ‘*Daiva*’ and the
‘*Ārṣa*’ are not permitted at all.—(25)


