+++
title = "026 पृथक् पृथग्"

+++
‘*Singly*’—this is a inert re-iteration, each single form having been
already prescribed in the foregoing verses. The ‘mixed’ form is what is
prescribed here; where the ‘*Gāndharva-Rākṣasa*’ are prescribed
independently of (apart from) the other forms. The notion derived from
what has gone before being that each form stands apart by itself, just
like the *Vrīhi* being used apart from the *Yava*,—the present verse
lays down the combination (of two). When we have two such texts as
‘offer the *Vrīhi*’ and ‘offer the *Yava?* each of which prescribes a
substance to be used at a sacrifice independently of the other,—we
conclude that the two are meant to be optional alternatives, and they
are not meant to be mixed tip; because, if the mixture of both were
used, we would be obeying neither the injunction of *Yava*, nor that of
*Vrīhi*. Similarly, in the present case, when only one girl is to be
married, it being impossible to adopt any two forms of marriage, the
present text proceeds to prescribe the combination of two of them.

Such a combination of the said two forms would be possible under the
following circumstances:—A girl living in her father’s house, happens to
see a boy living in the same house and having heard praises from
messengers, falls in love with him, but not being mistress of herself
she cannot meet him,—and then she enters into a compact with her lover,
requests him to take her away by some means or other, and gets herself
carried away: and the bridegroom, being possessed of great strength,
carries her away after having ‘killed and wounded’ (her guardians): Now
in this case, since there is ‘voluntary union between the two’ (verse
32), it fulfils the conditions of the ‘*Gāndharva*’ form: while, since
he has carried her away, after ‘having killed and wounded’ (verse 33),
the conditions of the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ form also become fulfilled.

These two forms are possible for the *Kṣatriya* only. *These two are
lawful for the Kṣatriya*—says the Text.

*Mentioned before*—is a mere reiterative reference.

Others have offered the following explanation:—When a *Kṣatriya* marries
several girls, he marries one by the ‘*Gāndharva*’ form, and another by
the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ form:—and this is the ‘*mixed form*’ meant by the text.
And when all are married by one or the other of these two forms, it is a
case of ‘*separately*’ mentioned by the text. And from this we gather
that it is only these two forms of marriage that the *Kṣatriya* might
adopt promiscuously—sometimes the one and sometimes the other; while in
the case of the ‘*Prājāpatya*’ and the rest, he should adopt the same
form in all his marriages which he happens to adopt in the first.—(26)


