+++
title = "027 आच्छाद्य चाऽर्चयित्वा"

+++
The author now describes the exact nature of the several forms of
marriage.

‘*After having dressed*.’—What is meant is a particular form of
dressing, ordinary dressing being absolutely necessary (and hence
implying no special regard). Hence the. meaning is—‘After having dressed
with nice and suitable clothes, such as might be available at the
place.’

‘*Having worshipped*;’—*i.e*., having done worship with bracelets,
armlets and other ornaments, and also special modes of honouring,
indicative of great affection.

There is nothing to indicate the connection of the ‘dressing’ and
‘worshipping’ with either the bride only or with the bridegroom only:
hence they should be taken as relating to both.

‘*Endowed with learning and character*.’—This implies also the other
qualifications of the bridegroom, mentioned in other law-books; such as
‘intelligent, loved by the people, having his virility carefully tested’
(Yājñavalkya, *Ācītra*, 55).

‘*Himself*;’—*i.e*., not previously requested by him.

‘*Invites*’ him;—*i.e*., gets the bridegroom to come, by sending bis own
man.

This giving away of the daughter is the ‘*Brahma form*’ of marriage.
Though the term ‘form’ is a general one, yet, in consideration of the
context, it has to be taken as standing for *marriage*.

The upshot of this definition comes to be that ‘when a man obtains a
wife without asking for it, and with due honour, it is the *Brahma* form
of *marriage*.’

“The definition provided in the text cannot be right; as, in reality,
‘marriage’ is for the purpose of accepting a wife \[so that the mere
‘giving’ by the father cannot be *marriage*.\]”

The ‘giving’ spoken of in the text is meant to extend right up to the
end of the marriage-ceremony; in fact, until the marriage has been
performed, the ‘giving’ is not complete; it is at the time of ‘marriage’
that there is ‘acceptance’ of the girl by the bridegroom; and until this
*acceptance*, the ‘gift’ is not complete. Specially, ‘giving’ here does
not consist merely in the renouncing of one’s proprietary right; it
extends up to the creating of the proprietary right of another person
(the recipient). It is in view of this that the author is going to
declare later on—‘the learned should regard the seventh step as the
final stage of the marriage’ (5.152). Thus, then, it is at the time of
marriage that the maiden should be given away; it is for this reason
that the author of the *Gṛhyasūtra* has laid down the rites in
connection with the *Brāhma* marriage as to be performed at the time of
the marriage itself.

As for the ‘giving’ before the marriage, this is merely a verbal
compact; and if no such compact has been entered into, it is just
possible that at the desired time the marriage may not be actually
performed; for in the absence of formal agreement, the father of the
bride may not give her, or the bridegroom may not accept her. Hence it
is necessary that before the actual marriage, a regular contract should
be entered into, in some such form, ‘she is to be given by you and
accepted by me.’ \[Just as an internal sacrifice becomes naturally
excluded when it is deficient in some essential factor and does not
fulfil the conditions of the injunction.?\]

Some people argue as follows:—“When the cow and such other things are
given away for the purpose of obtaining a transcendental result, the
*giving* is accomplished merely by the recepient accepting it with the
proper texts and the same should be the case with all acts of *giving*.
So that, in the case in question also, marrying occupying the same
position as *accepting*, ‘marriage’ should be regarded as synonymous
with *acceptance*; and the act of *accepting* consists in *making the
thing one*’a *own*; as says the revered Pāṇini in Sūtra 1. 3. 56—‘The
root *yama* with the prefix *upa* in the sense of *making one’s own*
takes the Ātmanepada.’ From this it is clear that marriage is done only
for the purpose of *receiving the maiden*.”

This, however, is not right. In fact, the ‘marriage’ is of the maiden
that has been *accepted*, and it is for the purpose of making her a
*wife*. The Injunction bearing upon marriage is not in the form
that—‘one should *accept* the maiden by means of this rite;’ nor are the
sacred texts recited at marriage such as signify the act of *accepting*;
as is the case with such *mantras* as—‘*devasya tvā pratigṛhṇāmi, etc*.’

As for what has been said regarding the sense of *making one’s own*,
such a sense is not incompatible with our view. The act of ‘marrying’
also is of the nature of *making one’s own*. The act of ‘giving’ only
brings about the ownership of the recipient; and the act of ‘marrying’
creates a particular form of ownership. Further, the wife is not a
‘property’ in the same sense that the cow and other things are; the
latter are property’ in the sense that they may be used in any way one
likes, while the maiden married by one can be used only as ‘wife so that
the relation between husband and wife is of that of a peculiar kind of
ownership; as will be shown later on, under 5. 152.—(27).


