+++
title = "030 सहोभौ चरताम्"

+++
The ‘*Prājāpatya*’ form of marriage is that in which the girl is given
away on the clear undertaking having been taken in so many words that
“you both together shall duly Fulfil your duties.”

‘*Duty*’ has been mentioned only by way of illustration; the undertaking
refers to ‘*duty*,’ ‘*property*’ and ‘*pleasure*’ also; as, in all these
three, the interests of the husband and the wife are common. In reality,
what is actually uttered is the word duty’ only, the expression used
being ‘may duty be performed by you both,’ and not that ‘may duty,
property and pleasure he accomplished:’ but, in consideration of what
has been said in other law-books, the term ‘*duty*’ in the said
expression has been explained as standing for ‘property’ and ‘pleasure’
also. Hence the conclusion is that the expression ‘may duty be performed
by you both together is to be pronounced at the time that the girl is
being given away to the person upon whom the condition has been imposed
that ‘this girl is to be given to you only if you fulfil your duty,
property and pleasure along with her,’ and who has accepted the
condition at the time of marriage. Thus, then, even though⁽property’ and
‘pleasure’ also are meant to be included, yet they are not actually
mentioned, because they are not of sufficient importance. Says Gautama
(4. 7)—‘In the Prājāpatya form of marriage, the mantra used is *may you
together perform your duty*;’ and the use of the term ‘*mantras*’
clearly shows that the words to be used should be precisely as they are
laid down here, Just as in the case of *mantra-texts*. Further, in the
case of very powerful men, it would not be right to make it a condition
that the wife shall partake of all their properties and pleasures; and
yet that these also are meant we learn from other law-books.

This form of marriage is inferior to the preceding ones only by reason
of this condition being imposed; as this shows that there is a desire on
the part of the giver for some sort of return from the recipient.

The bridegroom also is made to repeat in his words the condition that he
accepts; and the exact form laid down is not for the giver only. For
‘having made to repeat’ would have been enough if only one of them were
to say it, the phrase, ‘*with the words*,’ would have been superfluous;
the act of *repeating* being always by means of words only. Says the
author of the *Gṛhyasūtra*—‘Having said *this is true for you*, he
should make the bridegroom say *this is true for us*.’ In fact, the
prefix in ‘*anubhāṣya*’ (‘having made to repeat’) clearly indicates the
*confirmation* of what has been said before.—(30).


