+++
title = "034 सुप्ताम् मत्ताम्"

+++
The unwillingness of the girl is the condition common to the ‘*Rākṣasa*’
and the ‘*Paiśāca*’ forms: the difference is that in the former there is
*beating*, while in the latter there is *stealth*.

‘*Asleep*’—overpowered by sleep.

‘*Intoxicated*’—senseless, under the influence of wine, &c.

‘*Unconscious*’—who has lost consciousness on account of the disorders
of the wind-humour.

‘*By stealth*’—not openly.

‘*Approaches*’— has sexual intercourse with.

This is the Paiśāca marriage, of all marriages the ‘*wickedest*’—the
most sinful. That is to say, the issue of such a marriage does not
become the *rightful* child.

------------------------

In connection with this subject, some people think that the
‘*Gāndharva*’ form of marriage is accomplished by mere ‘intercourse,’
the ‘*Rākṣasa*’ by mere ‘abduction’ and the ‘*Paiśāca*’ by mere
‘approach,’—irrespective of the sacramental rites relating to the
‘taking of the hand’ and the rest. And they base this idea upon the fact
that all these three are mentioned in apposition to ‘marriage’ which
forms the subject-matter of the context.

But, according to these people, in the ‘*Brāhma*’ and other forms also,
since the ‘giving’ is mentioned in apposition to ‘marriage,’ the
sacramental rites would cease (to be necessary factors in the marriage).
But we have shown above, how. these rites cannot be omitted. The fact of
the matter is that it is only figuratively that the term ‘marriage’ has
been applied to that act of ‘*giving*’ which is done for the purpose of
‘marriage.’

As regards the ‘*Gandharva*’ form, the revered Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana has
described it, in connection with the union of Duṣyanta and Śukuntalā, as
being ‘without fire and without sacred texts;’ and this shows that there
are certain sacramental rites of ‘taking the hand,’ etc., but they are
done without sacred texts etc.

As regards the ‘*Paiśāca*’ form, there is a difference of opinion:—In
this form (it is argued) ‘approaching’ is the prime factor; but that
does not deprive the girl of her ‘maidenhood;’ as this can be put an end
to only by the sacramental rites attendant upon marriage; so that the
girl still continuing to be a ‘maiden,’ the prohibition of rites in
connection with ‘non-maidens’—which we find in the statement that ‘the
sacred texts relating to marriage are restricted to *maidens only*’ (8.
226)—does not apply to this form of marriage; and hence its connection
with the sacramental rites remains undisturbed. The prohibition just
referred to is for the purpose of precluding the sacramental rites (from
the case of non-maidens); while the girl married by the ‘*Paiśāca*’ form
has her maidenhood destroyed only when she has gone through the rites.
Thus, then, even though the ‘approaching’ may take place first, yet the
taint of ‘non-maiden-hood’ does not apply to her. It is only in
accordance with this view that Karṇa can be called ‘maiden-born;’ for if
mere intercourse with man were to deprive the girl of her maidenhood,
how could we have such a statement as ‘the son born of a maiden is
called *maiden-born*.’ If, on the other hand, the name ‘maiden’ be
applied only to such girls as have not had the sacramental rites
performed for them, then the said statement would be all right, Karṇa
and others of his kind, being sons of *unmarried* girls. It is only if
‘approaching’ be the prime factor that it is possible for a child being
born from a ‘maiden.’ In fact, we find in stories the description of the
‘marriage’ of girls who had been previously ‘approached’ by the
‘Paiśāca’ form.

It might be asked—“when sexual intercourse has been already accomplished
with the help of intoxicants, etc., what would be the use of the
sacramental rites?”

The answer to this is as follows:—Though the act of copulation has been
accomplished, and the man. has transgressed the prohibition of
intercourse with a ‘maiden,’ yet the performance of the rites is
necessary,—firstly, for the purpose of making her entitled to share in
the religious acts of her husband, and, secondly, for the purpose of
avoiding the sin of repeating the act of having intercourse with a
‘maiden.’ This form of marriage is thus deprecated by reason of its
involving a transgression of the prohibition of having intercourse with
a maiden, and also because it subserves the purely physical purposes of
the man (and not any religious purpose).

The above view, however, is not right; because, in ordinary parlance,
the term ‘maiden’ denotes the girl who has had no intercourse with man,
and not one for whom the sacramental rites have not been performed. In
fact, even though her sacramental rites have not been perforated; if a
girl happens to have sexual intercourse with man,-she ceases to be
regarded as a ‘maiden;’ and when such girls have taken to the profession
of prostitutes, intercourse with them does not involve the sin of having
intercourse with a ‘maiden.’ It is true that the words ‘virgin’ and
‘maiden’ have beeu regarded as referring to a female in the earlier
years of her age; but, in connection with rules relating to marriage,
they are always used in the sense of one who has had ho intercourse with
man. It is for this reason that when a man is found to be seeking
marriage with a girl who maintains the appearance of a virgin, and does
not openly go in for sexual intercourse,—he is warned by people with
such words as—‘she is no longer a virgin, her virginhood has been
destroyed.’

Further, in the case of marrying such a girl, there would be a serious
deficiency in the sacramental rites themselves. *E.g*., the rite of
‘conception’ has to be done with sacred texts, such as
‘*Viṣṇuryoniṅkalpayatu, etc*. (Ṛgveda, 10.184. 1),—which means ‘May
Viṣṇu generate upon your generative organ;’ and there can be no
‘generation’ (by Viṣṇu) of what has already been generated’ (by another
man); so that the use of the sacred text in this case would be
meaningless. Nor could, any such text be used when an unmarried girl
would be ‘approached’ in the ‘*Paiśāca*’ form; as it has been definitely
declared that it is to be used only in the case of ‘married’ girls. Nor
would it be right to hold that the ‘generation’ (spoken of in the said
text) refers to the case of marriages other than the ‘*Paiśāca*;’ for
the use of the text has been prescribed without any restriction at all.

The above and several other difficulties crop up if ‘approaching’ is
regarded as the principal factor. The term ‘*Upagamana*,’ ‘approach,’
then, should be taken as standing for the acts of embracing, kissing and
such other concomitants of actual ‘intercourse;’—such use of the term
being due to the fact that the said acts are concomitants of, and lead
up to, the act of ‘intercourse.’ As regards the expression, ‘the
maiden-born son,’ inasmuch as the direct meaning of the term ‘maiden’ is
not applicable, it is taken in its indirect meaning of ‘one who has not
gone through the sacramental rites.’ As for the case where the
sacramental rites are performed even after ‘intercourse,’ such cases are
very rare. Then, as regards the statement—‘when the sacrament is
performed for a pregnant girl, with or without the knowledge of her
being so, etc.’ (9. 173),—this refers to cases where the person
performing the sacramental rites is not the same that has had the
previous intercourse with her; so that this would not be a case of
‘*Paiśāca*’ marriage at all; as in this latter, the girl is given in
marriage to that same person who has had intercourse with her (during
sleep, etc.), and that same person would be performing the rites for
her. Then again, so far as the performance of rites for the pregnant
girl is concerned, it has been directly laid down by scriptural texts.
All this we shall explain in full detail under Discourse IX.

Others, again, have held the view that—“in reality, the *intercourse*
itself is the principal factor; for, if it were not so, there would be
no point in the prohibiting of *intercourse* (with maidens).”

But if ‘intercourse’ were the principal factor, then that itself would
constitute ‘marriage;’ none other being possible, according to the
reasoning just put forward; so that there would be no object for the
prohibition, as ‘intercourse,’ when *voluntary*, would constitute the
*‘Gāndharva*’ marriage; when ‘*forcible*,’ it would be ‘*Rākṣasa*’
marriage; and in other cases it would be ‘*Paiśāca*;’ and no other
‘intercourse,’ without rites is possible, whereby the prohibition could
apply to all forms of ‘intercourse.’ As a matter of fact, however, there
certainly is an object for the prohibition,—in the shape of such cases
where there is forcible intercourse by stealth, or where the girl is
given away by her parents, but no sacramental rites are performed. This
latter cannot come under the ‘*Gāndharva*’ marriage; as it is not
‘voluntary’ on the part of the girl. It is for this reason that in such
a case the husband does not incur the sin of having intercourse with a
‘maiden;’ as this latter contingency happens under totally different
circumstances.

Thus, then, since the performance of sacramental rites has been
interdicted in the case of girls who have already had sexual
intercourse,—and since the ‘*Paiśāca*’ also is, like the ‘Brāhma’ and
the rest, a means (of acquiring a wife),—and since, therefore, this form
also is capable of being culled ‘marriage,’—it follows that what is
denoted by the term ‘*approach*,’ ‘*upagama*’ (‘intercourse’) is only a
secondary factor.

The differentiating characteristics of the eight forms of marriage are
as follows (1) that marriage which comes without asking, just like
landed property, gold and the rest, is ‘*Brāhma*;’ (2) that which comes
by virtue of one’s priestly character is ‘*Daiva*;’ (3) that which is
accompanied by the present of a cow and a bull is ‘*Ārṣa*;’ (4) that
which is accompanied by the condition, ‘may you together perform your
duties,’ and which comes either by or without asking, is ‘*Prājāpatya*;’
the characteristics of the others are easily discerned.

In the words, ‘*Brāhma*,’ etc., the nominal affix denotes *relation*;
and the relationship of Brahma and the rest is ascribed to the marriage,
with a view to eulogising it. So also in the rest. In the case of the
term ‘*Paiśāca*,’ the meaning is ‘that which is fit for Piśācas,’ and it
connotes deprecation.—(34).


