+++
title = "035 अद्भिर् एव"

+++
‘*For the chief of twice-born men*;’—*i.e*., for Brāhmaṇas.

‘*Giving away of the daughter*—when one is giving away his daughter, the
giving away ‘*with water*,’ ‘*is commended*.’ That is, when one is
giving his daughter to a Brāhmaṇa, he should give her ‘with water’ only.

“How can *water* be the instrument (means) of *giving?*”

What is meant is that without water, there can be no ‘giving;’ since we
have the law—‘alms and gifts should be given *with water*, after the
uttering of the syllable *namaḥ*, and so also in all religious acts.’

Or, by the restriction expressed by the phrase, ‘*with water alone*,’
the text means to exclude the ‘*Ārṣa*,’ the ‘*Āsura*’ and the
‘*Prājāpatya*;’ as in these latter, *water* is not the only instrument
used; other instruments also being used; such as ‘a cow and a bull,’ as
also the compact (that ‘you should perform your duty together’).

What is really meant (by the girl being given ‘with water alone’) is as
follows:—Just as when a cow, or gold or such other things are given, the
giver does not impose any conditions,—such as ‘this cow should be thus
tended by you, she should be fed upon such and such grass,’ and so
forth,—in the same manner should the girl also be given; and the father
shall not, through his great love for his daughter, impose upon his
son-in-law any conditions; nor should he receive from him any presents.

As for the *Kṣatriya* and other castes, there should be ‘giving’ of the
girl, when there is mutual desire on the part of the bride and the
bridegroom; and not otherwise, as it is done in the ‘Brāhma’ form of
marriage.

Others explain this as follows—what is meant by ‘*mutual desire*’ is
that the father may either receive presents or give her ‘with water’
only.

According to this explanation, it becomes indicated that the ‘Brahma’
form of marriage pertains to all castes.—(35).


