+++
title = "038 दैवोढाजः सुतश्"

+++
The girl wedded by the *Daiva* form of marriage is called ‘*the wife
married by the Daiva* *form*:’ and the son born of her.

\[In the term ‘*Kāya*’\] ‘*ka*’ stands for Prajāpati; and that marriage
of which he is the presiding deity is ‘*Kāya*.’ In reality, marriage is
a sacramental rite consisting in the ‘taking’ (of the girl’s hand), and
there is no connection with any deity; still Prajāpati is called its
‘deity’ only figuratively. Though it is true that there are offerings
made to Prajāpati during the marriage-rites, yet, since such offerings
are common to all the preceding forms of marriage also, -they cannot
form the ground for the name ‘*Prājāpatya*’ being given to any
particular form. Further, such an explanation (of the name being based
upon the presiding deity) would not be available at all in the case of
the names ‘*Āsura*’ and the rest: as at no marriage-rite are any
offerings made to the *Āsura* and others.

The short vowel in ‘*ḍha*,’ in the term ‘*Kāyoḍhaja*,’ is in accordance
with Pāṇini 6. 3.63 (where much latitude is allowed in the case of the
final vowels of feminine endings).

“In the Text it is found that the marriage-form with inferior results
has been mentioned after that with superior results; so that the
‘*Ārṣa*’ should have been mentioned after the ‘*Prājāpatya*’ (in verse
25).”

There is a special reason why the ‘*Prājāpatya* though with superior
results, has been mentioned last. In verse 25 above, it has been
declared that ‘of the five three are lawful, etc., etc.,’ when the
‘*Prājāpatya*’ is meant to be included (among those permitted for the
*Kṣatriya*); while if the ‘*Ārṣa*’ were mentioned after the
‘*Prājāpatya*’ (on the ground of the inferior results of the former),
then it would be the ‘*Ārṣa*’ that would become included (among those
sanctioned for the ‘*Kṣatriya*’).—(38)


