+++
title = "045 ऋतुकालाभिगामी स्यात्"

+++
Marriage has been described. Marriage having been accomplished, and the
wifehood of the girl having been established, one might have the idea
that he was entitled to have intercourse with her that same day; hence,
with a view to preclude the possibility of this being done, the text
proceeds with the following rules.

One should not have recourse to his wife immediately after marriage, on
the same day; he should wait for her puberty. In fact, the authors of
*Gṛhyasūtras* have declared that ‘after marriage, for three days or
twelve days, or tor a year, the pair should take food without salt,
observing continence and lying down upon the ground.’ (*Āśvalayana*, 1.
8. 10-12.) Hence, if puberty appears in course of the year, there should
be no intercourse; similarly, even after the said time, there is to be
no intercourse before puberty. In this manner, there is to inconsistency
between the present text and the rule laid down by Aśvalāyana. As for
the mention of the option of ‘three days,’ etc., what is meant is that,
if the pair happen to be very passionate, they might adopt the lesser
periods, but others should observe continence (for the full period of
twelve months).

‘*Season*’ is that period of time during which the bodily condition of
woman is marked by a flow of blood and indicates her capacity for
conception. The actual sight of blood being merely an indication, even
after the actual flow has ceased, the time that follows—up to the limit
to be described below—is also called the ‘season.’ Or, because of the
association of the name ‘season’ with the term ‘period,’ the period
itself may be regarded as the ‘season;’ and in this case, we would have
the appositional compound (in ‘*ṛtukāla*’).

The person who has resolved to approach only during the season is culled
‘*one who observes the rule* *of* *approaching only during the season*;’
the affix ‘*ṇini*’ (in *gāmī*) having the sense of *vote* or *resolve*,
according, to Pāṇini 3. 2. 20; just as we have in the case of such terms
as ‘*sthaṇḍilaśāyī*,’ ‘*aśrāddhabhojī*,’ and the like.

‘*Syāt*’— should be. Even though the injunctive ending has been added to
the root ‘*as*,’ *to be*, yet what it enjoins is the act of
‘approaching;’ the phrase ‘*abhigāmī syāt*’ being equivalent to
‘*abhigacchet*, ‘should approach;’ specially as, unless one does the act
of *approaching*, he cannot become ‘*abhigāmin*.’

What sort of ‘*rule*’ is this? (*a*) is it that one must approach her
during the ‘season?’ (*b*) or that he should approach *her only*, during
the ‘season?’ That is to say, is the rule *restrictive* or *preclusive*?

“Well, the very name ‘*vrata*,’ ‘*vow*,’ indicates scriptural
*restriction*; and the verbal affix ‘*ṇini*’ denotes ‘vow;’ so that why
should there be any question of its being *preclusive?*”

Our answer to this is as follows:—We shall show later on that
*preclusion* also is scriptural in character and restrictive in form.

“What then is the difference between the two?”

Restriction is supplementary to Injunction.

“What is Injunction?”

Injunction is that word which expresses the idea of some act to be done;
*e.g*., in the sentence ‘one desirous of Heaven should offer the
Agnihotra.’ With the exception of this sentence, there are no other
words which could give us the idea of the *Agnihotra* as something to be
done. We have ‘restriction’ in a case where the partial idea of
something to be done for the purpose of a transcendental result is
obtained even without the scriptural words; *e.g*., if we have the
injunction ‘one should offer the sacrifice on even ground,’ in
connection with the *Daśapūrṇamāsa* sacrifices, the idea of some place
in general where they are to be performed is implied by the nature of
the act itself; no sacrifice can be performed, except at some place; and
places are of two kinds, *even* and *uneven*; now, in the event of the
sacrificer happening to select an even spot \[merely on the strength of
the general injunction of the sacrifice\],—the words, ‘should offer the
sacrifice on even ground,’ become merely descriptive; but if, by reason
of man’s desire being untramelled, some one were to elect to perform his
sacrifice on *uneven* ground, then the words, ‘should offer the
sacrifice on even ground,’ become useful by asserting the necessity of
adopting *even* ground; for, when the words clearly enjoin the *even*
ground, the avoiding of *uneven* ground follows directly from the fact
of its not being enjoined; so that the avoiding of uneven ground is
obtained from the implication of the injunction of even ground. For
every performance being dependent upon injunction, wherefore could there
be adoption of what is not enjoined at all? If such were adopted, there
would be no accomplishment of the act in due accordance with what has
been enjoined.

\[ The above being an example of Restriction from *Śrauta* literature\]
we have an example from *Smārta* literature in the shape of the
Injunction—‘One should eat food facing the East.’ When a man is going to
take food, it is open to him to face any direction he likes; so that at
one time he might face the East, at another he might face the West, or
any other direction; and when he would face the East, he would not face
any other, while when he would face another direction he would not face
the East. Hence in the event of the man electing to face another
direction, the injunction that ‘one should eat food facing the East’
comes in useful; and by disobeying this, one would be transgressing a
scriptural injunction.

Similarly, in the case in question, the act of approaching one’s wife at
any time one chooses aṇd not approaching her during the ‘season,’ would
make one open to the charge of transgressing the scriptural injunction;
as he would, partially (*i.e*., by not approaching during ‘season,’ and
by approaching out of season) be omitting to do what has been directly
enjoined; and the act of approaching (out of season) would make him
subject to expiation in the same manner as the transgressing of other
acts enjoined in the scriptures. When it is open to one to approach
one’s wife, through passion, both during ‘season’ and out of it, then we
have use for such a direction as ‘one should approach one’s wife *only
during season, and never out of season*,’ Just as the direction ‘five
five-nailed animals are edible,’ has its use when it is open to man,
under the influence of hunger, to eat the hare, etc., (which are
permitted), as well as the monkey and the rest (which are not
permitted). In this case, there is nothing to indicate that the two sets
of animals may he eaten in turn (as it is possible in the case of the
approaching of one’s wife during ‘season’ and also, at another time,
‘out of season’). So that in the case just cited (of the edibility of
five five-nailed animals), there is possibility of both (eating of hare,
etc., and eating of monkey, etc.) being done simultaneously; and hence
we have the direction ‘*only five* five-nailed animals are edible,’
which serves to preclude the other alternative (of *all* five-nailed
animals being eaten). And thus, in this case, we have *Preclusion*.

“But they say that Preclusion is beset with three defects: in every case
of Preclusion three defects crop up: (1) the renouncing of its meaning,
(2) the assuming of a different meaning and (3) the setting aside of
what is possible.

\(1\) Now in the case of the words, ‘five five-nailed animals are
edible,’ the idea afforded by it is in the affirmative form—‘five
five-nailed animals should be eaten:’ and this is renounced when the
words are taken to mean the negativing of the eating of animals other
than the five.

\(2\) Further, no negation is expressed by the words of the sentence;
hence, when it is taken as *preclusive*, a meaning different from its
own becomes assumed.

\(3\) Lastly, it being open to the hungry man to eat all animals, when
the sentence is token as preclusive, that which is possible becomes set
aside. These are the three defects that beset every case of preclusion.”

There is nothing in all this. If the man is hungry, the eating of
animals is already open to him; so that no injunction being needed for
that purpose, it is not possible for the sentence to be taken in its
direct sense (that certain animals shall be eaten); and hence, in order
to guard against the futility of the injunction (if token
affirmatively), if it is taken in the negative sense (of *preclusion*),
there can be no incongruity in this. It has been thus declared—‘when
what is laid down is what is absolutely unknown, it is a case of
*injunction*; it is a case of *Restriction* when the course laid down is
partially (*i.e*., optionally) possible; and it is a case of
*Preclusion* when what is laid down is possible, as also something
else.’ (*Tantravārtika* 1. 2. 42).

Now we have to consider what is the right view to take in regard to our
text.

Since the present case fulfills the condition of Preclusion that ‘what
is laid down is possible, as well as something else,’ it should be taken
as a Preclusion. It is possible for the man to approach his wife ‘during
the season’ as well as ‘out of season;’ but if the approaching is done
‘daring season,’ then it cannot be done ‘out of season’ at the same time
(*i.e*., both alternatives are not possible at the same time). Just as
when the man is hungry, it is open to him to eat at *śrāddhas* as well
as not at *śrāddhas*; and when the rule says, ‘he should eat not at
*śrādḍha*,’ he simply avoids eating at *śrāddhas*; and he does not give
up all food, seeking thereby to obey the injunction of not eating at
*śrāddhas*;—similarly, when the man has a longing for intercourse, it is
open to him to have recourse to it at all times, and we understand the
present rale to mean that ‘one should not approach one’s wife out of
season.’ The act of approaching itself being already possible by reason
of the man himself desiring it, it is only right that the sentence
should be taken as laying down the proper time for that act. Otherwise,
it would be prescribing something not referred to before at all.
Farther, the obeying of the injunction of begetting children is possible
only for one who has married; and this begetting is possible only by
approaching one’s wife daring ‘season;’ so that the act of approaching
daring ‘Beason’ is already rendered possible by all this. Then, again,
for one who has already got a child, the act of approaching oue’s wife
again for the purpose of begetting a second child cannot be regarded as
being done in accordance with the injunction of begetting children, for
the injunction being in the form ‘one should beget a child,’ and the
singular number in ‘child’ being meant to be significant, the injunction
will have been duly fulfilled by the- begetting of the first child.
\[Thus, then, there would be no point in the present text enjoining the
act of approaching one’s wife during ‘season’\]. Nor could the
approaching be taken as laid down for the purpose of accomplishing a
transcendental result; because it is not possible to impose upon it
either the character of a sacramental rite, or that of an act for a
definite result; specially, as the act of approaching during ‘season’ is
already implied by the injunction of ‘begetting a child.’ From all this
it follows that the statement that ‘one should approach one’s wife
during season’ is meant to prohibit the act ‘out of season;’ so that, in
its own(?) form, it is merely re-iterative (of what has been enjoined in
regard to the begetting of a child), but in its indirect sense it is a
*Preclusion*. And when thus taken in this indirect sense, the passage
comes to serve a distinctly useful purpose.

When it is thus, taken, then this text does not conflict with what has
been said in Gautama’s work. In the latter, it is asserted—‘one should
approach one’s wife during season, or at all times, with the exception
of the sacred days’ (5. 1-2); and here the phrase, ‘or at all times,’
mentions an option, which permits freedom of action; and there would be
no point in laying down any such rule as ‘one may do the act *at all
times*, during season as well as out of season;’ and (as the words
stand) when the preceding clause is taken as laying down the rule that
‘one should approach one’s wife during season,’ the same verb, ‘should
approach,’ being construed with the subsequent phrase, ‘at all times,’
this also would have to be regarded as a rule, occurring as it does in
the same context as the preceding rule; specially because, so long as
the word is not actually repeated in the text (and is construed with the
latter clause only as it stands in the preceding clause), no different
meaning can be attributed to it. And it has already been explained that
there would be no point in any restriction being imposed, apart from the
‘season.’

From all this it follows that the assertion regarding ‘approaching
during season’ is meant to prohibit the act ‘out of season.’ For one who
has not yet got a son, the restriction (regarding approaching during
season only) is got at from a different injunction (that of begetting a
child); but for one who has already got a son might do what he likes
(hence the prohibition becomes useful).

The act of approaching the wife out of season having been prohibited,
the text proceeds to make an exception in the case of the wife evincing
a desire for intercourse—‘*In consideration of her, he may approach her,
except on the sacred days*.’ ‘Her’ refers to *the wife*. ‘*In
consideration of her*,’—*i.e*., intent upon pleasing her mind.

‘*With the desire for sexual intercourse*,’ ‘*ratikāmyayā*,’ *i.e*., in
consideration of her wishes,—not by one’s own wish—one may approach her
with a view to the pleasures of sexual intercourse,—one who has already
got a son may do this during ‘season,’ and one who has not got a son may
do it out of season.

Or, the pronoun ‘*tat*’ (in ‘*tadvrataḥ*’) may be construed with
‘*ratikāmyayā*;’ such irregular construction being permissible, in view
of the work being a text-book of *Smṛti*. The meaning in this case would
be—‘with a view to giving *her* pleasure, he may approach her at other
times also, except on the sacred days.’ And in this case, we might
assume the presence of an ‘a,’ the term being ‘*aratikāmyayā*’—*i.e*.,
‘*not* with a view to giving pleasure to himself.’ But in the
explanation that has been given before, there would be no use for
assuming this ‘a,’ nor for construing the pronoun ‘*tat*’ apart from its
context.

The ‘*sacred days*’ shall be described later on (4. 128) as—‘the
moonless day, the eighth day, the full-moon day and the fourteenth day.’

‘*Attached to his own wife*’—*i.e*, one should be ever bent upon
satisfying her. Or, it may be taken as the prohibition of having
recourse to others’ wives, the meaning being—that ‘one should love one’s
own wife, and should never make love to the wife of another person.’

‘*Ever*’—throughout life one should observe this rule.

Thus the conclusion is that the present verse contains three
statements.—(1) the first is that ‘one should approach one’s wife during
season,’ which only reiterates a rule already laid down elsewhere for
one who has not yet got a son; (2) the second statement is that ‘when
urged by one’s wife, one should approach her with a view to sexual
intercourse, during season as well as out of season, except on the
sacred days;’ (3) and the third is that ‘one should be attached to one’s
own wife only.’ The verbal construction would be (*a*) ‘one should
approach one’s wife during season,’ for the purpose of begetting
children; (*b*) ‘with a desire for sexual intercourse he should, in
consideration of her, approach her;’ (*c*) ‘he should be attached to his
own wife.’—(45)


