+++
title = "049 पुमान् पुंसो"

+++
‘*Seed*’—the man’s semen, and the woman’s ovule. Says the revered
Vaśiṣṭha—‘man is the product of semen and ovule’ (15.1).

When the man’s ‘seed’ is in excess of the woman’s, then, even on the
uneven days, a male child is conceived; similarly, on the even days also
a female child becomes conceived, if the woman’s ‘seed’ happens to be in
excess.

This statement is meant to lead the man seeking for a son to have
intercourse with his wife on the uneven days also; the sense of the
instruction being that—when the man finds that by the use of
aphrodisiacs and strengthening food he has become vigorous in his
virility, and that his wife has, for some reason or other, become weak,
then he should have intercourse with her, when desirous of getting a
son.

The ‘*excess*’ meant here is not that in *quantity*, but that in
*virility*.

*When the two are equal*, *there in burn either a non-male*, *or a boy*
and a *girl, together*. ‘*Non-male*’ stands for the hermaphrodite,
according to some people.

Some people read ‘*sāmye*;’ and it means that ‘in case of equality of
both, a non-male is born.’

‘*Or a boy and a girl*’—When the wind in the womb stirs up the mixed
semen and ovula and divides it into two equal parts—a small quantity in
-one part, and an equal quantity in another part of the womb,—then twins
are born; and in those two equal parts also, in that part where the
woman’s seed happens to be in excess the girl is born, while in the
other part, where the male’s seed is in excess, the boy is born.

When the seed is weak—in virility—then ‘*there is failure*;’ either
non-conception, or the birth of a hermaphrodite.—(49)


