+++
title = "067 वैवाहिके ऽग्नौ"

+++
The section on Marriage is finished.

In the fire in which the marriage-rites have been performed, one should
perform the ‘Gṛhya rites,’—*i.e*., rites that have been prescribed by
the authors of *Gṛhyasūtras* as to be performed with the help of fire;
*e.g*., the *Aṣṭakā śrāddha*, the *Pārvaṇaśrāddha*, Libations, and so
forth.

‘*Five sacrifices*’—to be described later on;—‘*the rite*,’ the
performance of these—(should be done) in that same fire.

“Though the text speaks of the ‘five sacrifices’ without any
specification, yet (among them) the Vaiśvadeva-offering alone is to be
made in the fire; in the offering of the water-libations, etc., there is
no need for the fire. Why then should the text speak of the ‘rite of
five sacrfices’ as to be performed *in the fire*?”

Some people explain that, though the locative ending is one only, yet it
may be regarded as diverse in reference to the diversity in the objects;
hence, in the present context, the term ‘five sacrifices’ has been used
in the sense of a part only of the five sacrifices.’

Or (another explanation is that), the phrase, ‘*in the* *f* *ire*,’ is
not to be construed with the ‘*rite of the five sacrifices*,’—the
Vaiśvadeva-offering, which is made into fire, being already included in
the preceding phrase (‘*gṛhya* rite ’). The construction in this case
would be—‘the Householder should perform the rite of the five
sacrifices, and in the Marriage-fire he should perform the *gṛhya* or
domestic rites, as also the daily cooking.’

The term ‘*gṛha*,’ *house*,’ denotes *wife*; hence what is meant is that
the ‘*householder*,’ *i.e*., one, who has married a wife, should perform
the rites, in association with one’s wife.

Some writers on the Gṛhyasūtras have declared that at marriage, fire
should be produced by the friction of two sticks; while, according to
others, one may bring burning fire from anywhere he likes and make his
offerings into that.

The injunction that the domestic rites shall be performed in the
marriage-fire implies that the fire kindled at marriage shall be kept
up.

On this point some people make the following observations:—The
maintaining of the marriage-fire should be necessary for the *Śūdra*
also; as for him. also the performance of the ‘*Pākayajña*’ has been
ordained; nor does the present text specify any particular caste; all
that is found is the general term ‘householder,’ and the *Śūdra* also is
a ‘householder,’ the marrying of a wife being prescribed for him also.
This is what has beeu declared elsewhere (in Yājñavalkya, *Ācāra*,
97)—‘The householder should everyday perform the *smārta* rites in the
marriage-tire.’”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—What has been declared is that
‘Gṛhya rites are to be performed in the marriage-fire;’ but there is no
special rite named ‘*gṛhya*;’ hence the name ‘*gṛhya*’ should be taken
as indirectly indicating the rites prescribed by writers on
*Gṛhyasūtras*; and these writers have prescribed the rites for the three
higher castes only, and not for the *Śūdra*. In fact, in the Gṛhyasūtras
we find a summing up in the words—‘The sacrificial rites have been
described, we are now going to describe the Gṛhya rites;’ and the
purpose for which these words have beeu added is to imply that ‘those
persons only are entitled to the performance of the *Gṛhya* rites who
are entitled to that of the *sacrificial* ones;’ and it is not meant, as
it has been explained by others, that the latter constitute the duty of
others also. If this had been meant, then it would not have been
asserted that—‘the times for *Prāduṣkaraṇa* and Homa are analogous to
those of the *Agnihotra*.’ Nor, again, is it right to take the term
‘*gṛhya*’ to mean ‘pertaining to the home’ (domestic); for the term
‘home’ (*gṛha*) could only mean either ‘house’ or ‘wife;’ now, as a
matter of fact, for no rite has the ‘house’ been specifically prescribed
as the location, in view of which the rite could be prescribed for the
householder in terms of the ‘house,’ Then, again, such rites also as are
performed for the sanctification of one’s house—such for instance, as
the testing of the building-site, and so forth—have been prescribed for
the three higher castes only, and not for the *Śūdra*. If, on the other
hand, the term ‘home’ means the ‘wife,’ then the act meant having been
already implied by the term ‘householder,’ the name ‘*gṛhya*’ would be
superfluous.

As for the statement in the other *Smṛti* (Yājavalkya, *Ācāra* 97)—‘The
householder should every-day perform *Smārta* rites in the
Marriage-fire, or in the fire set up at the time of partition, and the
*Śrauta* rites in the sacrificial fires,’—here also, since it has not
been specifically stated what the ‘*smārta* rites’ are, the statement
must be taken as qualified by some other statement; specially because,
as a matter of fact, all *smārta* rites cannot be performed in fire; nor
is there anything to indicate that the term refers to *Homa* (offerings
into fire) only; nor, again, is it necessary that all *Homa* -offerings
shall be made into fire.

From all this the term ‘gṛhya’ has to be explained as standing for the
*rites prescribed by the* authors of *Gṛhyasūtras*. Both these *smṛti-*
texts (the present one, and Yājñavalkya I, 97) only refer to what has
been prescribed by the authors of *Gṛhyasūtras*. So that how could there
be any setting up of the fire by a *Śūdra?*

Further, Yājñavalkya’s text lays down the additional fact that ‘Śrauta
rites are to be performed in the sacrificial fire;’ and this must be
taken as pertaining to the three higher castes only. Under the
circumstances, if the former statement (regarding *smārta* rites) were
taken as pertaining to all the four castes, and the latter (regarding
the *śrauta* rites) to three castes only, then this would involve the
incongruity of one and the same set of words having two different
imports. And, so long as a uniform import can be found, there can be no
justification for admitting such a diversity.

‘*Daily*’—that which is done day after day; *e.g*., the cooking that is
done every day for one’s own food;—this also is to be done in the same
fire.—(67)


