+++
title = "068 पञ्च सूना"

+++
This verse serves to indicate the occasion for the prescribing of the
‘five sacrifices.’

‘*Slaughter-houses*’—*i.e*., it is as if they were slaughterhouses.
Places where animals are killed for the purpose of their flesh being
sold, or those where meat is sold, become sources of sin, by being used
for the purpose of obtaining meat; similarly, the hearth and other
things also, being sources of sin, come to resemble the
‘slaughter-house.’

As a matter of fact, there is no direct scriptural prohibition bearing
specifically upon the ‘hearth’ and other things; nor is there any
general prohibition regarding them. It is not impossible for men to have
a desire for the heat (provided by the hearth). We do not find any such
*acts* as are accomplished by means of the hearth, etc., which could be
prohibited by other texts. Nor can the prohibition be inferred from what
is stated in the present text itself; for the simple reason that it is
clearly understood as to be construed along with the next verse (which
is an *injunction*, not a *prohibition*); so that, if the present text
were taken as a prohibition, this would involve a syntactical split; and
further (the use of the Hearth, etc., being prohibited by this verse)
the occasion for the performance of the ‘Five Sacrifices’ would be
afforded only when the acts that are done by means of the Hearth, etc.,
would be done by means of other things. Nor, again, have the peculiar
characteristics (of such acts) have been described anywhere, the
presence whereof would indicate the similarity of certain acts (to the
acts accomplished by means of Hearth, etc.) and their consequent
prohibition. And a further result of this being taken as the prohibition
of the Hearth, etc., and as such having no connection with the
injunction of the sacrifices, would be that the sacrifices would be
performed by such men as would eat food cooked by others (and thus avoid
the use of the Hearth), or would use water directly from the river and
other reservoirs (thus avoiding the use of the water-jar). Then, again,
if a prohibition of the Hearth, etc., were intended, then directly
prohibitive words would have been used in the text; why should it have
been left to be inferred? Direct assertion is always more forcible, if
the prohibitive implication were admitted for the purpose of indicating
the expiatory rites to be performed in connection with the acts,—then
the right thing would have been to include it under Discourse XI (where
expiatory rites are dealt with). Further, such a prohibition might lead
to the abandoning of the particular acts; but the use of the Hearth
cannot be avoided; hence there can be no prohibition of them; and there
being no prohibition, wherefore would there be any expiatory rite?

From all this it follows that the ‘Five Great Sacrifices’ are not to be
performed for the destroying of sins; bub what is meant by saying that
they serve to expiate,—destroy—the sin involved in the using of the
Hearth, etc., which cannot be avoided for a single day—is that the daily
performance of the sacrifices is absolutely essential and compulsory.

‘*Becomes stricken*’—the first consonant is *v*; and the meaning is that
‘he is stricken by sin, and is ruined in regard to his body and
belongings, etc.;—or, (if we read *ba*) the meaning may be that ‘be
becomes connected with (tainted with) sin the root (in ‘*badhyate*’)
denoting *overpowering*.

‘*Using*’—*i.e*., employing for one’s purpose. When a man employs the
hearth and other things for such purposes as present themselves, he is
said to ‘use’ them.

*Hearth*.—place of cooking; the oven, etc.

‘*Grinding-stone*’—the stone-slab, and the grinding piece.

‘*Household implement*’—such things as the pot, kettle and such other
household requisites.

‘*Pestle and mortar*’—by which corn is thumped.

‘*Water-jar*’—the pot containing water.—(68)


