+++
title = "078 यस्मात् त्रयो"

+++
‘*Because men in all the three states are sustained*’—*i.e.,
helped*—‘*with knowledge*’—*i.e*., knowledge brought about by the
expounding of the meaning of the Veda—‘*and food*,’ by the
Householder,—therefore, ‘*the Householder’s state is the highest*’—best.

If we read ‘*gṛhī*’ for ‘*gṛham*,’ the compound ‘*jyeṣṭhāśramaḥ*’ should
be expounded as a *Bahuvrīhi*; while with reading ‘*gṛham*’ it is
*Karmadhāraya*.

Here also the specification ‘*by Householders only*’ serves only to
re-iterate what is right and proper, and it does not mean that persons
in the state of the Recluse and others are not to do the work of
teaching. In fact, for the Recluse the work of teaching has been
specially enjoined in the verse—‘he should perforin these great
sacrifices, etc.’ (below, 6. 5). As for the Renunciate, it is true that
the according of any help to anybody has been prohibited by the rule—‘he
should take no part in injuring or helping’ (*Gautama* 3. 24-25); but
the expounding of the meaning of the Veda has been actually enjoined
among the duties of the Mendicant. Further, for the Recluse and the
Renunciate, much effort would not be needed in the expounding of the
Veda, as they are required to cultivate a high degree of knowledge,
dispassion, thought-power and practice. As for the Religious Student,
the work of teaching would interfere with his own proper work (of
study); and as for the gift of food, how could this be possible for him,
when he himself has been advised to live on alms?

Thus, since it is for the Housholder alone that the two are generally
possible, the text has used the phrase ‘*by Householders only*.’— (78)


