+++
title = "080 ऋषयः पितरो"

+++
This verse contains the injunction of the exact form of the Five
Sacrifices.

The term ‘*teaching*’ here includes ‘learning’ also: as will be
explained in verse 74 below. The mere act of ‘reciting’ does not require
any pupils. In the Vedic text describing the ‘debts’ of man, it has been
stated in general terms that ‘by means of Vedic study one pays off one’s
debts to the sages.’ For these reasons, both ‘teaching’ and ‘learning,’
according to circumstances, constitute ‘the offering to Brahma.’

‘*Tarpaṇa*’—the offering of ‘food or water,’ as described below, in 82.

‘*Homa*’—the offering into fire made to the deities to be described
later on.

‘*Bali*’—*i.e*., offering made into receptacles other than fire, such as
the wooden mortar and the like. This is the ‘*offering to
elementals*;’—*i.e*., the offering made in honour of the elementals.
This is only the name of a particular rite.

The making of offerings has been prescribed under the name of ‘*bhūta*,’
‘lemental,’ in the text—‘offerings made to elementals stalking during
the day, etc., etc.;’ and through association, the whole set of rites is
expressed by the term ‘offering to elementals.’ Just as among the
‘*Cāturmāsya*’ sacrifices, though the *Āmikṣā* is the only one substance
that is offered to the Viśvedevas, yet the entire set of rites has been
spoken of us ‘*Vaiśvadeva*’ in the injunction, ‘one should offer the
*Vaiśvadeva* sacrifice.’ The term ‘*bali*’ is applied to such *Homas* as
are offered into receptacles other than fire; and they explain that
‘*bali* is offering to the gods.’

The ‘*honouring*’—*i.e*., receiving—‘*of guests*’ constitutes the
‘offering to men.’

“How can *Vedic study* be a ‘sacrifice?’ In it there are no offerings
made to gods; nor has any deity been mentioned in connection with it;
all that is done in it is that the letters of the Veda, without any
sense, are recited; and it has been said in connection with the
repeating of Vedic texts that some people say the words have no
meaning.”

True; the term ‘sacrifice,’ as also the term ‘great,’ are used (in this
connection) only figuratively, and they are meant to indicate high
praise. To the ‘honouring of guests,’ also the name ‘sacrifice’ is
applied only figuratively. Though it is possible for the Guest to be
regarded as a ‘deity,’ yet in the original injunction of the act, the
injunctive verbs used are ‘should feed,’ ‘should honour,’ and not
‘*should sacrifice*’ to guests. Just as we find in the expression
‘*puruṣarājāya karma vā*’ (where the act done in honour of the king of
men is also called ‘sacrifice.’)

These ‘Five Sacrifices’ are not to be performed simultaneously; because
the occasion for all is not the same; in fact, a distinct occasion has
been mentioned in relation to each. If the occasion for all were one and
the same, then, even when three or four of them would be done, it would
be as good as not done, till all the five were done. Just as in the case
of the *Darśapūrṇamāsa* sacrifice, (which?) consists of the three
sacrifices of the *Āgneya*, the *Agnīṣomīya* and the *Upāṃśu*, the
performance of only one or two of these does not discharge the complete
liability; and just as among the Domestic Rites themselves, the
‘Vaiśvadeva offering,’ which extends up to the ‘*Sviṣṭakṛt*’ offering,
is not regarded as complete, so long as there is a break in the offering
to any single deity. In fact, each of the five sacrifices has a distinct
occasion mentioned in relation to itself:—*e.g*. (1) ‘one should be
constantly addicted to Vedic study’ (verse 75), (2) ‘one should be
constantly addicted to making offerings to the gods’ (verse 75), and so
forth; and the prescribed occasion being distinct for each, each is
performed separately by itself; (3) as regards ‘honouring of the guest,’
the injunction for this appears quite distinctly (in 105), where the act
is described as ‘conducive to prosperity and fame.’

Further, of these five ‘sacrifices,’ the performance of four depends
upon the man himself; while that of ‘honouring the guest’ is conditional
upon the arrival of the guest. The guest is not to be invited; as in
that case he would not he a ‘guest’ (in the proper sense of the term);
as we shall explain later on that a person is a ‘guest’ only when he
comes of his own accord (unexpectedly). Thus, then, from among the five,
if one performs any one only and omits the rest,—one might incur the sin
of omitting to do what one should do; but what he has done does not
become as good as not done. It is for this reason that when a man has
not set up his own fire, though he is not, on that account, entitled to
the *Vaiśvadeva Homa*, yet it is incumbent upon him to perform ‘Vedic
Study,’ ‘*Tarpaṇa*’ and the rest. As for the setting up of one’s own
fire, other Smṛtis permit of this being done at other times also; it is
not necessary to set it up along with marriage itself. Says the
Smṛti—‘the setting up of the Fire begins either with marriage or with
succession.’

“The option of setting up the Fire at the time of succession may he
regarded as applicable only to one who has not married at all.”

This would he so if the setting up of the Fire were an end in itself. As
a matter of fact, however, the ‘setting up’ is for the purpose of
obtaining the Fire, and the Fire is for the purpose of performing rites;
rites, again, have been laid down as to be performed by one only when he
is associated with his wife, and not alone by himself. It is true that
some *Gṛhya* -writers have asserted that one should perform *śrāddhas*.
after having kindled the *Parameṣṭhiprāṇa* Fire; but this also pertains
to the man as associated with his wife; and this same also would be the
time for his ‘succession’ also. Nor is the performance of *śrāddhas*
impossible for one who has not set up the Fire; as it has been
prescribed even for one who has not even been ‘initiated’, in whose case
the use of the ‘*sradhā*’ alone has been excepted; and yet there is no
setting up of the. fire for him; as it is only one who is ‘learned’ (in
the Veda) that is entitled to it, and he is still without that learning
(before Initiation). As for the performance of the *Śrāddha* (though
this also presupposes knowledge of Vedic mantras), yet it has to be done
by the uninitiated boy to the best of his ablity, in obedience to a
direct injunction; this case being analogous to the performing of a
sacrifice by the Niṣāda (Śūdra) in accordance with a direct injunction.
Iu the event, however, of fire having been set up by his uncle or other
relations, in view of a ‘learned’ performer being available, the
uninitiated (and hence unlearned) boy is not entitled to the performance
of *śrāddhas*. If the setting up of fire be found to be prescribed in
the same context as *śrāddhas*, then one could set up the tire as an
accessory to the *śrādd* *ha*, after the completion of which it would he
abandoned.

Some people have quoted the *Smṛti*—“ The *Vaiśvadêva Homa* may be
offered in the ordinary fire also.” Others, again, hold that it is to to
performed by means of dry (uncooked) grains.—(70)


