+++
title = "081 स्वाध्यायेनाऽर्चयेतर्षीन् होमैर्"

+++
What is meant by the words ‘*svādhyāyamadhīyīta*’ (‘one should study the
Veda’) is exactly what is meant by the words, ‘*one should worship the
sages by Vedic Study*.’

As a matter of fact, what is called *worship* is done either (*a*) by
means of faith and devotion, or (*b*) by means of offering water for the
feet, garlands and sandal-paint. But the present verse is purely
eulogistic; ‘Vedic Study’ cannot be the means of either of these two
forms of ‘worship’ of the sages. As for the *mantras* of the Veda, those
also contain praises of Agni and other gods (and not the sages). For all
these reasons the statement that ‘one should worship sages by Vedic
Study’ is purely eulogistic.

Or, the term ‘*sages*’ may be taken as standing, not for *Marīci* and
other persons (generally known as ‘sages’), but for the *Vedas*
themselves. The term ‘*svādhyāya*’ (Vedic Study) here denotes an
*action*; it does not stand for the *Veda*, as it does in the sentence,
‘*svādhyāyo* *dhyetavyaḥ*’ (‘the Veda should be studied’). Hence what
the passage means is that ‘one should worship the Vedas by the act of
study;’ *i.e*., one should study them in the proper manner; no other
form of ‘worship’ being possible.

‘*The gods by Homa-offerings*’—here also the ‘worship’ is figurative;
for in a Homa, the deity is not the most predominant factor,—being only
a subordinate factor, tending to the fulfilment of the act.

‘*The Pitṛs by Śrāddha offerings*’—here the Injunction is to be taken in
its direct sense; and this shall be explained under the section on
‘*Śrāddha*.’

‘*The men*’—*i.e*., guests, beggars, and so forth—‘one should
worship’—*i.e*., give them food with due respect.—(81)


