+++
title = "082 कुर्याद् अहर्-अहः"

+++
This verse praises the original injunction by deprecating its omission.
Some people read this verse with the Dative
ending—‘*devatātithibhṛtyebhyaḥ pitṛbhyaścātmane tathā na nirvapati
panchabhyaḥ*.’

‘Offering’ here stands for actual *giving away*, not merely
*assignment*; hence, the Dative should be the right form.

He who does not make gifts to these,—even though he may be
‘*breathing*,’—carrying on the function of inhaling and exhaling
air,—‘*does not live*;’ *i.e*., is as good as dead, his living being
absolutely fruitless.

The term ‘*dependents*’ here should be taken as standing for ‘old
parents’ and others mentioned below (in 11.10); it does not stand for
*servants*; as gifts to these latter are made in return for services
rendered. Or, it may be taken as indicating such born slaves as become
incapable of rendering further service, on account of old age. We shall
also explain later on that it is necessary to feed old bulls, etc.
Gautama also has declared that ‘decrepit people, and those devoid of
livelihood, should be supported by him’ (10. 61).

The ‘offering’ to the gods consists of (*a*) pouring libations into
fire, (*b*) throwing ‘bali’-offerings on prepared altars; for what other
‘offering’ could there be, except these?—which is what is found in other
cases also;—*e.g*., those of the offerings made to the Viśvedevas and
other deities of the *Darśapūrṇamāsa* sacrifices, where the offerings
are made with such *mantras* as ‘*Agnaye tvā juṣṭam nirvapāmi*;’ where
also mere relationship (with the gods) is what is meant. It is for this
reason that the ‘elementals’ (to whom the *bali-* offerings are made)
become included under ‘gods,’ and hence not mentioned separately.

‘*Himself*’ has been added by way of illustration; the sense being—“just
as, without eating, one’s own living is not possible, and for that
purpose the use of food is absolutely necessary, in view of one’s life
being a very desirable thing,—specially according to the direct
injunction that ‘one should guard oneself against all things’—so also is
the feeding of gods and the rest absolutely essential.”—(72)


