+++
title = "083 एकम् अप्य्"

+++
Since the offering to the Viśvedevas has been enjoined under the name
‘*Śrāddha*,’ it would follow that the entire procedure of the Śrāddha
has to be gone through at that offering also; hence the present verse
proceeds to preclude a certain portion of that procedure. ‘*On this
occasion*’—of the daily *Śrāddha—one* should not feed any Brāhmaṇas in
honour of the *Viśvedevas*,—*i.e*., with reference to these.

On this point, some people make the following observations:—“Since
feeding is already understood as forming part of the Śrāddha, the
presence of the verb ‘should feed’ in this verse indicates that this
feeding is something new (different from the feeding that forms an
integral part of all *Śrāddhas*.) Hence the *Śrāddha* that is laid down
in the present verse is to be regarded as consisting merely in the act
of feeding one Brāhmaṇa, and there is nothing else to be done at it, in
the shape of the offering of a vessel of water, oblations, and so forth;
nor are the restraints relating to ‘avoidance of sexual intercourse,’
‘omitting of Vedic Study,’ and so forth to be observed in this
connection.”

‘*Should feed even one Brāhmaṇa*’—the number of Brāhmaṇas to be fed
having been fixed at *three*,—and what is said (under 3.125) regarding
the feeding of ‘one at each of the two’ not being of.the nature of an
Injunction—the number ‘one,’ which has not been indicated by any other
authority, is what is distinctly enjoined here;—the sense being that
‘one should feed even one Brāhmaṇa,—but also many, if possible.’

‘*In honour of the pitṛs*’—*i.e*., for the purpose of satisfying the
pitṛs.

‘*That which forms part of the Five Sacrifices*’—*i.e*., that which is
included among the Five Sacrifices; this term being used here in the
sense of ‘*Śrāddha*;’ what is spoken of as ‘what forms part of the Five
Sacrifices’ is not the *Tarpaṇa*—offering (of water); but the
combination of this *water—offering* and the *feeding* of the Brāhmaṇa.
The optional alternative to this shall be described below, under
3.283.—(83)


