+++
title = "089 उच्छीर्षके श्रियै"

+++
‘*That state*’—*i.e*., the Householder’s.

‘*Should be kept up with care*’— should be maintained by one who desires
Heaven and one who is desirous of obtaining happiness in this world.

‘*Atyantam*,’ meaning ‘that of which there is no end,’ implies
*permanence*.

‘This state, *which cannot be maintained by men with weak organs*.’

The sense is as follows:—For the Householder, intercourse with women,
eating of rich food and such other luxuries are inevitable; but if one
were to become unduly addicted to such sensuous objects, one would be
incurring sin; hence it is said that ‘this has to be kept with greater
care than the other states;’ specially as in the Householder’s state
great restraint of the organs is called for; such for instance, as one
should not have intercourse with one’s wife, except during ‘season,’ he
should not have recourse to other people’s wives, he should eat only
such food as has been left (after the offering to the gods and the
feeding of guests). And Restraint, when the objects of enjoyment are
within reach, is extremely difficult.

‘*Imperishable heaven*;’—by this it is not meant that the attainment of
Heaven is the result of performing all the duties of the Householder;
because, as a matter of fact, among the duties of the Householder some
are compulsory (and as such not leading to any results), and for others
other rewards have been mentioned. It is true that those acts in
connection with which no rewards are mentioned are assumed to have their
reward in the attainment of Heaven; but in the present context these
duties only form subjects of *reference*; and hence, there would be no
point in the specifying of any rewards in connection with them. Hence
the phrase in question has to be taken merely as a reference to such
*desirable results* as follow from the prescribed acts. Nor can the
present text be taken as stating the desire for a definite result as
constituting the occasion for the performance of certain fresh duties;
because the same duties that have been prescribed as necessary
throughout life might very well be spoken of as to be performed by one
who is desirous of obtaining Heaven; specially as the mention of Heaven
is clearly found to be on the same footing as ‘desiring happiness in
this world,’ which is a reward that can have no connection with anything
that is enjoined; for ‘happiness in this world’ can never be recognised
as the reward of any religious act, specially as no particular form of
happiness is specified; we do not find the happiness in any way
specified as that proceeding from the acquisition of landed property, or
of a son, and so forth. And if the happiness is not specified, it means
the same thing as ‘Heaven.’ But Heaven cannot be said to beloug to ‘this
world.’ Hence this phrase should be taken as referring to the
experiencing of perceptible (physical) pleasures. Men in the other
‘states’ are without homes, living either under trees or in the house of
other people; and as such they live uncomfortably. Hence the phrase
‘desiring happiness’ has to be taken as a mere reiterative reference.
And, consequently, the former phrase, ‘desiring Heaven,’ also, standing
on the same footing, has to be taken as a re-iterative reference.—(79)


