+++
title = "094 कृत्वैतद् बलिकर्मैवम्"

+++
The right definition of the ‘guest’ shall he given later on (in 102);
when such a guest has arrived, he shall feed him *first*,—*i.e*., before
all others that may be near the house and may be going to eat.

*Alms to one who is a mendicant*’—*i.e*., he should give it to a person
that asks for it. The term ‘*alms*’ stands for the gift of a small
quantity of food; it has been said that ‘it is a handful that
constitutes *alms*;’ and this is well known among housewives.

‘*In the proper form*,’ to ‘*a Brahmacārin*’—to others even to a beggar
that may be a disguised heretic, alms may be given,—but not in the
proper form; but to the Brahmacārin it should be given ‘*in the proper
form*;’ *i.e*., the giving is to be preceded by the syllable ‘*svasti*’
by the *recipient*; this is the ‘form’ referred to.

Or, the term ‘*bhikṣu*,’ ‘mendicant,’ in the text may be taken in the
sense of the *Parivrāṭ*, the Renunciate,—and the term ‘*brahmacārī*’ in
that of one who is still in the first stage of *Studentship*. The
particle ‘*ca*’ occurs in the wrong place on account of exigencies of
metre; it should occur after ‘*brahmacārine*.’

But under this explanation, no alms would ever be given to the Recluse
(the person in the third stage.) Hence the right view appears to be to
take the term ‘*bhikṣu*’ (mendicant) in the sense of ‘one who begs,’ and
the term ‘*brahmacārin*’ (*chaste*) as a qualification of the former.
And in this way the giving of alms to persons in all the three stages
becomes regularly sanctioned. As for heretics, they are to be treated
like outcasts (*vide* 92),—and the mention of ‘all’ (in 93) has already
enjoined the helping in the form of giving food, according to one’s
means, to all living beings.—(94)


