+++
title = "101 तृणानि भूमिर्"

+++
What is said here is supplementary to the two offerings spoken of in the
latter half of the foregoing verse; and the first, half of this verse
prescribes the receptacle for those two offerings.

The dwelling on the top of another dwelling is called the ‘*upper
dwelling*.’ In the case of a single-storied house, it means the *roof*.
There one should make the offering to the ‘roamers at night’ and
‘roamers during the day.’

‘*Sarvānnabhūtaye*’—‘*for the purpose* *of* *acquiring all kinds* *of
food*’;—the Dative ending has the sense of ‘for the purpose of,’ ‘with a
view to,’ and not that of ‘recipient;’ for no oblations have been laid
down as to be offered to any such deity as *Sarvānnabhūti*; specially,
as the term ‘offering’ in the present verse is supplementary to the
preceding verse, and the offerings prescribed in the preceding verse
require the mention of a receptacle for them. Even in other *Smṛtis* no
such deity as ‘*Sarvānnabhūti*’ has been mentioned in connection with
the ‘*Vaiśvadeva*’ offerings. Hence, what the word means is that ‘the
act is to be done *for* *the purpose o* *f* *acquiring all kinds of
food*;’ *i.e*., ‘when this offering is made, all kinds of food are
obtained.’ And when the etymological signification of a word is found
compatible with the context, there can be no justification for assuming
a signification for the word as a whole (irrespectively of its
etymology.) So that, if the word (‘*Sarvānnabhūti*’) were to be taken as
signifying a deity, an absolutely unknown denotation will have to be
attributed to it.

‘*The remnant of the offerings*;’—tbe use of the term ‘remnant’ implies
that the offering material has to be collected in a vessel and then
offered, and that the oblations are not to be taken out of what is
contained in the cooking pot.

‘*Towards the South*’—*i.e*., in the southerly direction; *i.e*., the
man should face the south.

‘*Entire*’—*i.e*., all that has been taken out in the vessel.—(91)


