+++
title = "103 नैकग्रामीणम् अतिथिम्"

+++
This sums up what has gone before.

The epithet ‘*all*’ indicates that one should help with food the deer,
the cock, the cat and such other animals as grow in the villages.

‘*Honour*’ here denotes *help*, not *worship*; us worship could not
apply to dogs, &c. In fact, what is meant is the forbidding of
ill-treatment; and it in with this view that the author has not used the
term ‘help.’

‘*Highest place*’—*i.e*., he reaches Brahman.

‘*By the straight path*’—*i.e*., he has not to wander through an endless
series of births as different animals.

*Question*—“Is this verse meant to lay down the reward (to be
obtained)?”

We say—*no*. For it has already been explained that the injunction of
the offerings is an obligatory one; and if a reward happen to be
mentioned in connection with an obligatory act, it can only be taken as
a commendatory description. Nor is any injunctive word found in the
verse; the word used is ‘*goes*,’ in the present tense.

‘*With a body of light*’—*i.e*., with a body made up of light only; he
is no longer tramelled with a body made up of the five elemental
substances; *i.e*., he becomes of the nature of pure Consciousness. Or,
the term may be takeu as connoting *freedom from sin*; the meaning being
that he becomes pure of character. The act done is one of helping all
beings; and when the man does not transgress any scriptural injunctions,
he incurs no sin; and hence it is only right that he should be *pure*.
If it were otherwise, then *sin* being an impurity, he could never have
a *body of light*. There being no sin in him, it is only natural that
the man should reach the highest place, which consists in a state free
from all pain and suffering.—(93)


