+++
title = "108 वैश्वदेवे तु"

+++
Brāhmaṇas effulgent with learning and austerities, being unlike those
described above, are not ash-like. ‘*Effulgence*’ connotes superior
excellence; and persons are said to be ‘effulgent with learning and
austerities’ when they possess great learning and perform great
austerities. Though the ‘learning and austerities’ belong to the *entire
man*, yet here they are co-ordinated with ‘*mouth*,’ which is only a
part of the entire man; and such co-ordination is based upon indirect
connection \[the mouth being connected with the man, who is connected
with learning and austerities.\]

In the compound ‘*vipramukhāgni*,’ the *mouth* is likened to *fire*;
hence the compound falls within the ‘*vyāghrādi*’ group (*vide* Pāniṇi
2. 1. 56).

Just as an oblation thrown into the fire bears fruit, but when it is
thrown on ash, it is fruitless; similarly, ‘oblation’ in the shape of
food thrown into the Brāhmaṇa’s month. This *food* by being called
‘oblation’ is meant to be highly eulogised; sacrifice, oblation and such
acts are well-known as bearing important fruits; hence the lesser known
act (feeding of Brāhmaṇas) has been likened to the said well-known acts.

‘*Saves from trouble*;’—‘‘*trouble*’ stands for the advent of illness,
enemies, suffering at the hands of the king, and so forth; from this it
‘*saves*,’ protects; *i.e*., the man is not affected by it.

‘*Also from great sin*;’—*i.e*., it saves also from falling into hell,
&c.

It is not only the gifts made in connection with auspicious rites that
are to be given to the recipient described; gifts in connection with
expiatory rites also should be given to Brāhmaṇas possessing the same
qualifications.—(98)


