+++
title = "110 न ब्राह्मणस्य"

+++
Even for one who is extremely poor it is not right to omit the honouring
of the guest.

‘*Harvest-droppings*’— Ears of corn dropped in the fields after
harvesting.

‘*Gathering*’—Collecting.

This is meant to indicate difficulty of livelihood in general.

‘*Offers oblations into the five fires*.’

What is meant by this is that, even if the householder is one who obeys
all the injunctions of the scriptures, and he is also poor, and
(therefore) does not honour, with food &c., the guest that happens to
arrive,—then the said strict observance of the laws of livelihood
becomes fruitless. Hence (it is said) that the guest ‘*takes away all
his merit*’—*i.e*., nullities it;—if he ‘*stays unhonoured*.’ Hence one
should honour the guest—this is the meaning of the injunction.

The term ‘*slays*’ indicates that the injunction pertains to one who
arrives in the evening.

The ‘*five fires*’ are—The ‘Tretā’ (Three Sacrificial Fires), (4) the
‘*Gṛhya*’ (Domestic Fire) and (5) the ‘*Sabhya*’ (Social Fire).

“What is the fire called ‘*sabhya*,’ Social’?”

They offer the following explanation:—When one goes to another village,
and cooks his food in the ordinary fire;—or, in the house of a rich man
fire is lighted in several rooms for the alleviation of cold,—this is
what is called the ‘*sabhya*,’ ‘social’, ‘fire’.

“In that case, what is the *oblation* that would be offered in such a
fire? Since the rule is that⁽the *gṛhya* oblations are to be offered in
that fire (which is set up after marriage or after succession)’ \[
*Gautama* 5.7 & 8\]”.

On the strength of the present verse itself they say that, when the man
is away from home, he may offer the Vaiśvadeva oblations in the ordinary
fire also; and they quote the Smṛti-text—‘wherever one happens to see a
well-lighted flaming fire, he should offer into it oblations of dry
paddy, or of *vrīhi* and *yava*.’

Our revered teachers, however, offer the following explanation:—It is in
the Upaniṣads that the⁽science of the Five Fires’ has been described;
these five forms of fire have been assumed; and what is called
‘oblation’ here is the act of recognising the fire and worshipping it in
those forms. This worshipping has been recognised as leading to results
superior to those accomplished by means of all the *Śrauta* rites. In
connection with this, it has been declared that—‘the theft of gold, the
drinking of wine, having intercourse with the teacher’s wife and one who
kills the Brāhmaṇa,—all these four are fallen, as also one who has
relations with these \[ and even these sins are purified by the
knowledge of the science of Five Fires\].’

The result of all these five becomes lost if the guest is not honoured
and is sent away; this exaggerated praise is meant to convey the idea
that the said honouring of the guest is absolutely necessary.

In connection with the morning breakfast also there is the rule that the
guest should be fed; but the omission of it in the evening entails the
penalty of a higher expiatory site.

Some people do not take the phrase ‘to the best of his ability’ in the
preceding verse as applying to the ‘food; and they assert the meaning to
be that ‘guests should be honoured to the best of one’s ability—*i.e*.,
one or two or many (as many as one can).’—(100)


