+++
title = "113 इतरान् अपि"

+++
One who fives in the same village is not a ‘guest,’ even though he may
happen to come just at the time of the ‘Vaiśvadeva’ offerings.

‘*Companion*’—a fellow-student, other than one’s ‘friend;’ the rule
regarding the entertaining of the latter will come later—‘the Vaiśya and
the Śūdra and one’s friend, &c., &c.’ (Verse 110).

It appears right to take the term ‘*sāṅgatika*’ as excluding the man who
is in the habit of meeting all men on terms of equality, entertaining
them with jokes ami stories,—oven though he be such as has never been
met before.

For the Householder, when away from home, no one can be a ‘guest,’ even
though he may fulfil all the conditions of one; one is to be regarded as
such only when he ‘*arrives at one’s house*;’ *i.e*., to the place where
one lives permanently, that which is called his ‘abode.’ But even when
the man is away from home, if his wife and Fires happen to be there,
then the Brāhmaṇa arriving will be his ‘guest,’ even though he himself
may not be there. Hence the householder should provide for the
entertaining of guests during his absence, in the same manner as he does
for the maintenance of the Fires and the performance of the
*Darśa-Pūrṇmāsa* and other periodical sacrifices.

The term ‘or’ implies that (*a*) when the man goes on a journey taking
his wife and the fires with him, then, even during his stay in another
village, if some one arrives, he should be treated as a ‘guest;”—(*b*)
that the same is the case at his own house, during his absence, if his
wife and Fires are there that hence, when one goes out with his wife,
but leaves the Fires at home, the rule regarding the entertaining of
guests does not apply.

The term ‘or’ is to be construed with ‘should regard’ not as between the
‘wife’ and the ‘fires.’—(103)


