+++
title = "117 देवान् ऋषीन्"

+++
This is a mere reiteration of the foregoing injunction of the
performance of the Five Sacrifices, and of the time for the
Householder’s eating.

Others, however, have explained this verse its actually laying down
something different: The former verse has laid down the eating of
remnants by both husband and wife; while this verse leaves aside the
woman and lays down the eating by the man alone. And from this it would
follow that the wife should eat before the servants and before also the
husband. In this way, this becomes reconciled also with what has been
said before (113) regarding ‘the feeding of friends, &c., together with
the wife.’ Otherwise, if we assumed the latter to mean that the wife
should not eat with them, we would be abandoning the most palpable
construction of the sentence. As for what has been described in the
*Mahābhārata* (regarding Draupadī eating *after* her husbands), that is
a mere description, not an injunction. Even if it were an injunction, it
could only be regarded as laying down an option.

This, however, is not right; as the present verse is a mere reiteration.

Nor is there any incompatibility of the singular number in
‘*householder*’ (with the idea that both husband and wife are meant);
because in all things the Husband and wife operate conjointly; so that
their *companionship* being the prime factor, the use of the Dual member
does not become necessary. Just as in the text, ‘the Brāhmaṇa should set
up the fire,’ even though the husband and wife have got to perform the
rite jointly, yet there is no incongruity in the singular number. And
why so? Because one of the two is the principal and the other is
subordinate; and the subordinate cannot impose its number. Hence it is
that the principal being one only, though the wife also comes in in
fulfilment of her husband’s purpose, yet the singular number is the
right form to use. The single word ‘householder’ denotes the *wife*
also; and this is ip view of the joint functioning of the husband and
wife; and this is possible only when both are conceived of jointly, and
not if either both are regarded as *principal*, or both are regarded as
subordinate. From all this it follows that the wife is not to eat before
her husband; which establishes the conclusion that this verse is only a
reiteration, intended to lend strength to the conviction (arising from
the foregoing injunctions).

Some people have explained that, in the clause, ‘he should worship the
household deities,’ the term ‘deities’ is only a laudatory re-iteration;
and on account of its connection with the injunctive verb ‘should
worship,’ the sentence contains an injunction of the worshipping as a
subordinate factor. And they argue thus—“The primary denotation of the
term ‘deity’ is not compatible with the act of worshipping; as the
‘deity’ in the primary sense can only be related to the acts of
*sacrificing* and *hymning*. It is for this reason that the text has
added the epithet ‘*household*,’—which means *those in the house*; and
these can only be in the form of images. As those to whom sacrifices are
offered can have no connection with the house.”

For these people also what is to be taken in the secondary sense is the
‘*deity*,’ not the ‘worshipping.’

But why all this? The simple explanation is that the deities to whom
sacrificers offer sacrifices are called ‘*house* - *hold* deities’—(117)


