+++
title = "119 राजर्त्विक्-स्नातक-गुरून् प्रिय-श्वशुर-मातुलान्"

+++
In course of the entertaining of guests, the Text proceeds to lay down
the special form of honouring of a few other respected persons also.

‘*King*’—stands here for the annointed king of men, and not for the mere
*Kṣatriya* in general. The honour here prescribed is a very great one,
and every *Kṣatriya* does not deserve it. Nor would it be right to speak
of an ordinary *Kṣatriya* along with the ‘accomplished student’ and the
‘teacher;’ for there can be no similarity between the honour accorded to
the Teacher and to an ordinary *Kṣatriya*. There are Vedic texts also
indicative of the same conclusion. For instance, in the
*Ātithyeṣṭi-Brāhmaṇa* we read—‘the guest is like a *king of men*
arrived;’ and in connection with the rule of killing a cow for the
offering of ‘Honey-mixture,’ we find the guest spoken of as ‘the killer
of cows;’ all which goes to show that the said offering is meant for the
*king of men*. Hence the honour here mentioned is to be paid to a king
of men, irrespective of his being a *Kṣatriya* or not. But so far as the
*Śūdra* king of men is concerned, no honours are to be paid to him which
are accompanied by the recitation of Vedic Mantras.

“All that is prohibited is the uttering of *mantras* by the *Śūdra*;
there is no prohibition of the reciting of *mantras* by the Brāhmaṇa and
others at an offering made to the *Śūdra*.”

This does not affect our position; as the persons honoured have also got
to recite certain *mantras*, such as ‘*bhūtebhyastvā*, &c.’

“But in the *Mahābhārata* we read of the Honey-mixture offered by the
*Śūdra* also: ‘He himself offered to the Blessed Lord a seat fit for
him, as also the Honey-mixture and the cow,’—where Vidura is described
as offering it to Vāsudeva.”

In such cases, the term ‘honey-mixture’ is used figuratively in the
sense of *curd*, which is one of the ingredients of that mixture; and,
in common usage, the name of a thing is applied to another when the
latter helps in the bringing into existence of the former; when, for
instance, Butter is spoken of as ‘longevity’ itself.

From all this it is clear that the term ‘*king*’ here denotes the *king
of men*, and not the mere *Kṣatriya*.

The term ‘*priya*’ has been declared to mean the *son-in-law*.

‘*Accomplished student*’—*i.e*., accomplished, not in learning ail’d
observances both (but only in learniug, still keeping up the
observances). If it had stood for one who has accomplished and finished
*both*, then, since the ‘Teacher’ and the ‘Priest’ also would be such
‘accomplished students’ (there would be no point in mentioning these
separately). As for people in the other states (of the Recluse, etc.),
for these feeding on alms has been prescribed, and not eating in the
manner of ‘guests.’ Or, the term ‘*snātaka*,’ ‘*accomplished student*’
may stand for one who has only recently completed his course of Vedic
Study.

‘*He should receive*’—honour—all these.

The term ‘*honey-mixture*’ is the name of a rite; and the exact form of
this rite is to be learnt from the *Gṛhyasūtras*.

‘*Parisamvatsarān*,’ ‘*cominy after a year*,’—qualifies the King and
other persons to be honoured. The term means ‘over whom one year has
passed.’ The meaning is that they are entitled to the honour of the
‘honey-mixture,’ if they come after a year, not before that.

Some people explain the verse to mean that if they, happen to come
before the year, then, even though the full year may not have elapsed
since the last offering was made, yet they are to receive the offering.
Hut others hold that the honouring here prescribed is an annual
function; and not as often as they may come; and under this view, the
mere fact of their coming before the year is entirely out cannot be an
obstacle to the honour being offered.

Another reading is ‘*parisamvatsarāt*;’ which means that the honour is
to be held in abeyance for a year; after that they should be
honoured.—(119)


