+++
title = "120 राजा च"

+++
Some people hold that this verse serves to prescribe the honouring even
before the lapse of a year, if the persons happen to Arrive in
connection with a sacrifical peformance. Others, however, take it as
completing what has been said in the preceding verse; and if it be not
taken in this sense, then the statement ‘not if there is no sacrifice’
remains inexplicable.

The term ‘*learned man*’ here may be taken as standing either for the
person spoken of above as ‘accomplished student,’ or for the Priest; it
is for the latter that the offering of ‘Honey-mixture,’ when the
sacrifice is going to be performed, has been laid down. Though one would
perform the Soma-sacrifice several times during the year, yet the
Priests would help in the performance only if they have been duly
honoured. Thus it is only if taken in this sense that the text comes to
have a well-established basis (in the Veda). In any other sense, it will
have to have its basis assumed.

Others, however, take the term ‘*learned man*’ as referring to the
Priest and all the rest of them (mentioned in the preceding verse). In
fact, Gautama has said this in a general way: Having said that ‘the
honey-mixture is to be offered in the reception of the priest, the
father-in-law, the paternal uncle and the maternal uncle, (5-25), he
says ‘before the sacrifice and the marriage’ (5.27). And from this it is
clear that at the time that a sacrifice is going to be performed, all
those who deserve to be honoured should be honoured even before the
lapse of the year.

‘*Not if there is no sacrifice*;’—this prohibition applies to the
honouring before t he year is over, and not that which comes after it.

In connection with the second foot of the verse, there are several
readings:

Some people read ‘*tate yajñe upasthitau*,’ ‘who arrive when a sacrifice
has commenced;’ and they explain this to mean that ‘the honey-mixture’
is to be offered to them only if they come, by invitation, when the
performance of the sacrifice *has commenced*, and not when it is only
*going to be commenced*.

This view is objected to by some persous: In view of the general rule
that ‘the person initiated for sacrifice should not offer anything,’ all
offering is prohibited for the initiated sacrificer; so that, if the
offering of honey-mixture were now permitted, this would be contrary to
the said general rule. It will not be right to argue (in answer to this
that—“this is not an *offering*, since the injunction is that he *should
honour them*, so that it is *honouring* that is enjoined;” because in
the rite of the ‘Honey-mixture, ‘there is an actual *offering* of curd,
as also of meat and food. If it be said that “the man eats what belongs
to another person (without the latter *offering* it),”—in that case, the
act would involve the sin of theft. It may be argued that, “in view of
the direct assertion permitting such an act, it could not be regarded as
*theft*.” But in that case, the act of *giving* is there; in fact, th e
*giving* or *offering* also is actually enjoined in such texts as
‘should offer the honey-mixture.’ Hence the act would be contrary to
law. “The offering would be contrary to the law that ‘the Initiated
Sacrificer should not offer anything,’ only if the term ‘Sacrifice’
always stood for the *Soma-sacrifice* (in connection with which we have
the said prohibition); as a matter of fact, however, the terra stands
for the *Darśa- Pūrṇamāsa* sacrifices also; and the present injunction
may be taken as pertaining to these latter.” This also will not be
right; as, in this case, it will be contrary to usage: as a matter of
fact, cultured people do not offer the Honey-mixture to honoured persons
at any other sacrifice except the Soma-sacrifice; and Usage always
follows the Veda.

For all these reasons, the right reading is ‘*yajñakarmaṇyupasthite*’
(as we have explained already). As a matter of fact, it is only when an
honoured person arrives when the sacrificial performance is going to
commence that cultured persons receive him with the Honey-mixture; and
not after the performance has commenced. For this reason we do not even
stop to consider the point that the prohibition (of offering by the
Initiated Person) pertains to the act of *giving* in general, and not to
that act of *offering or giving* which has been enjoined in connection
with the sacrifice itself.

The compound ‘*yajñakarma*’ is to be expounded as the *Karmadhāraya*
compound: when this performance is approaching—going to be
performed.—(120)


