+++
title = "128 श्रोत्रियायैव देयानि"

+++
‘*He eats only sin*’—*i.e*., he accumulates sin in his heart; he places
that in his stomach, and not even a morsel of food;—‘*who cooks*’—gets
food prepared —‘*for himself*’—for his own eating; giving such
directions as—‘I am hungry, and I prefer such and such food; hence cook
these.’ Hence one should not have food cooked for himself, except when
he is in distress. When, one is in distress, then it is incumbent upon
him—in accordance with another injunction—to maintain his body, even at
the risk of disobeying a certain injunction; specially in view of the
law that ‘one should guard oneself against all.’

Such is the meaning attributed to this verse by some persons. But this
is not right; being contrary to another *Smṛti* text, which
says—‘whatever may be best, liked in this world, and whatever may be
most loved in the house, that should be given to the qualified person,
by one who wishes that thing to be inexhaustible.’ Now, if what is best
liked by the householder were not cooked, how could it be given to
others?

What the text means, therefore, is as follows:—So far as the daily
cooking is concerned, it is not with special reference to any person; it
is only when friends and relations turn up that special things are
cooked for them. If it were not so, then there would be no force in the
injunction of giving food to guests and others out of the food that has
not been cooked for any person in particular. What is meant is that the
evil mentioned in the verse attaches to one who eats food without
offering it to the guest, &c.;—or that, in the event of all the food
cooked being eaten up by the guest and others, the

Householder shall not have more food cooked only for himself. Vaśiṣṭha
has declared—‘the Husband and wife should eat the remnant; if the whole
has been eaten, cooking should not be done again.’ (11-11-12).

‘*The eating of the remains of sacrifices*;—this is only laudatory of
the ‘eating of what is left,’ enjoined above (in 117).

‘*Sacrifice*’—the Jyotiṣṭoma and the rest.

‘*Remains*’—what is left after use.—The ‘*eating*’ of this is called
‘*yajñaśiṣṭāśanam*’. Equal to this in its effects has been described the
eating—of what remains after the feeding of the guest and others,—of all
good householders, who are intent upon the obeying of the
scriptures.—(118)


