+++
title = "130 दूराद् एव"

+++
One is not to be fed simply because he is thoroughly versed in the Veda;
in fact, he should be examined ‘*from far off*;’ *i.e*., one should
carefully ascertain the purity of his father’s and mother’s families. It
has been declared that persons should be regarded as real Brāhmaṇaa on
both sides, only when it is found that everyone of their ancestors on
the father’s and on the mother’s side up to ten degrees were
accomplished in learning and austerities and their acts were virtuous;
this is what constitutes ‘examination from far off;’ similarly, the
man’s own learning and knowledge of practical details should be
ascertained.

‘*Vedapāragaḥ*’—he who has gone to the end of the Veda; *i.e*., one does
not become respected by reading the *Saṃhitā* only, or the *Brāhmaṇa*
only. Because we find this term used here, we conclude that the term
‘*śrotriya*’ is applied to one who may have learnt only a portion of the
Veda.

‘*Such a one is the channel for offerings to gods and
Pitṛs*;’—‘*channel*’ means *like a channel*. The ‘channel’ is that
whereby people descend to the water; hence what is meant by the metaphor
is the eulogium that ‘just as people seeking water get it only if they
go to it by the right channel, similarly, the offerings reach the gods
and ancestors only through the aforesaid *Brāhmaṇa*.’

In connection with gifts and charities also the Brāhmaṇa is the ‘guest.’
To the guest that arrives by himself, gifts are offered freely, and thus
given, they bring about great results; and, in the same manner, to the
said Brāhmaṇa the offerings to gods and ancestors should be given
freely; and when thus given, they become conducive to great
results.—(130)


