+++
title = "131 सहस्रं हि"

+++
The first cooking has been described: the second rooking is now
described.

‘*Evening*’—end of day, the advent of night; out(?) of the food cooked
at that time all the rites pertaining to the ‘Fire Sacrifices’ have to
be repeated, with the exception of the ‘*Brahmayajña*’ (Vedic Study) and
the ‘*Pitṛyajña*’ (*Śrāddha*).

“All that the text says is that she should offer the ‘Bali-oblation;’
and in ordinary usage it is only the⁴ *Bhūtayajña*’ (the offering to
elementals) that is called ‘*bali*.’ So that, whence do we get (out of
the words of the Text) either the pouring of libations into fire, or the
offering of food to guests &c.? in answer to this the following might be
urged—‘The offering prescribed in the verse is spoken of by the name
*Vaiśvadeva*, and the term, *Vaiśradeva*, denotes that the offering is
meant *for all*, being prescribed for *all gods* (*viśve devāḥ*). In
fact the term, *both morning and evening*, clearly indicates that the
offering in the evening is to be precisely similar to that in the
morning; it is for the purpose of conveying this sense that the term
*morning* has been used. If it were not so, then, since the *morning*
-offering has been already prescribed before, why should it have been
necessary to say here that it has been enjoined for both *morning and
evening*?” But in that case, the *Brahmayajña* and the *Pitṛyajña* also
should have to be performed (in the evening also),”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—The phrase ‘*out of the food
cooked*’ clearly indicates the doing of that alone which can be done
with the *food*,— and not of the *Brahmayajña*, which is done by means
of *Vedic Study*, nor of ‘*Tarpaṇa*’ (), which is done with *water*. We
construe the words of the Text as follows ‘*out of the food cooked, the
Bali-oblation should be offered*, and this rite, called Vaiśvadeva, is
prescribed as to be done out of the food cooked, both morning and
evening.’ That such is the meaning we deduce from the use of the term
‘*food*’ and that of the term ‘*vaiśvadeva*

‘*Without sacred formulas*;’—what is interdicted is the use of
expressions containing the names of the deity and ending with the
syllable ‘*svāhā*;’ such expressions, for instance, as ‘*agnaye svāhā*,’
and the like; no other sacred formulas have been prescribed in
connection with the *Vaiśvadeva* offerings; the said expressions are
called ‘sacred formulas’ (*mantra*) only with a view to eulogise them;
the real character of ‘*mantra*’ cannot belong to any expressions not
occurring in the Veda; all students of Veda accept that only as
‘*mantra*’ which forms part of the Veda, either in the form of *Ṛk,
Yajuṣ* or *Sāman*; and the meaning of words is ascertained from usage
only. Those expressions with which the *Bali* and other oblations are
made are not found in the text of any Veda; all that the *Śruti* says is
that ‘oblations should be offered to Agni and other deities;’ the use of
the syllable ‘*svāhā*’ also in the offering of all oblations is enjoined
in another text, which says that ‘oblations are offered to gods either
with the syllable *svāhā* or *vaṣaṭ*;’ but the use of the syllable
‘*vaṣiṭ*’ has been restricted to the end of the ‘*yājyā*’ *mantras* only
by the declaration ‘one should pronounce *vaṣaṭ* at the end of the
*yājyā*.’ In connection with the syllable ‘*svāhā*,’ the grammatical
rules lay down the use of the Dative affix. Thus it is that it becomes
necessary to use such verbal expressions as ‘*agnaye svāhā*,’ and the
like, because every secrificial offering is aimed for a deity, and it is
only by means of words that we know for which deity it is aimed.

“Under the circumstances, as the use of these expressions is prohibited,
how can the sacrifice he regarded as accomplished? For so long as the
gift is not completed by the assertion ‘this is for you, it is no longer
mine,’ the sacrifice cannot be regarded as accomplished. Merely giving
up a thing, without special reference to a recipient, cannot be called a
‘sacrifice’.”

This is true: the verbal reference to the gods being prohibited, the
wife shall make the reference mentally.Just as when the *Śūdra*
pronounces the syllable ‘*namḥ*,’ the use of the Mantra being replaced
in his case by that syllable—as declared by Gautama, who says ‘For the
*Śūdra* the syllable *namaḥ* has been ordained as the *mantra*’ (10.64);
and the utterance of the name of the deity is not permitted for him. And
yet it has been declared that even in this case the offering to the
Deity becomes duly accomplished. The revered teachers, however, have
declared that it is only the syllabic ‘*svāhā*’ that is to be replaced
by the syllable ‘*namaḥ*,’ and that the utterance of the name of the
Deity has not been prohibited.

*Question*:—“ Who is the real performer of the Vaiśvadeva offering in
the evening?”

*Answer*:—It has been already asserted that it is the wife, who will
make the offering without mantras; and this because she will be near
by.—(121)


