+++
title = "132 ज्ञानोत्कृष्टाय देयानि"

+++
*The śrāddha* described here is the compulsory one, as distinct from the
*Vaiśvadeva-śrāddha*, which is optional.

‘*On the moon-leas day*’— on the *Amāvāsya* day. There also not at any
and every time, but only ‘*after having performed the Pitṛyajña*.’ That
is, after having performed that *Ptṛyajña* which has been prescribed in
the *Śruti*. Thus the time for the *Śrāddha* in question comes to be the
same as that for this latter; and in connection with this it has been
laid down that the *Piṇḍapitṛyajña* is to be performed on the *Amāvāsya*
day, in the afternoon.’

Even for one who has not set up the fire, the performance of such
offerings is essential; as it is declared—‘the person who has not set up
the fire having made the accessary offerings &c.’

‘*The Brāhmaṇa with the fire*’—*i.e*., he who is keeping up the
marriage-fire, or who has set up the fire since succession to his
property. No significance is meant to be attached to the mention of the
‘*Brāhmaṇa*,’ since the *śrāddha* in question is meant to be performed
by the *Kṣatriya* and the *Vaiśya* also; hence it is that other *smṛtis*
have prescribed this *śrāddha* without special reference to any
particular caste.

‘*Piṇḍānvāhārya* *kam*;’—this is the proper name of this *śrāddha*; the
etymological explanation is that ‘that which is offered along with balls
of food, *Piṇḍas*, is *piṇḍānvāhāryaka*.’

‘*Month after month*,’—in one month, and also in another month. The
compound word connotes monthly repetition; thus the meaning is that the
*śrāddha* is to be performed every month. Thus it is that its compulsory
character becomes established. Though the term ‘*anumāsa*’ alone
dignities repetition, and the second term ‘*māsa*’ is superfluous, yet
prolixity (anti redundance) is not minded in a metrical treatise.—(122)


