+++
title = "133 यावतो ग्रसते"

+++
‘*Anvāhārya*’ is the name of the fee paid to the priests officiating at
the *Darṣa-Pūrṇamāsa* sacrifices; and the monthly *śrāddha* offered to
the Pitṛs is the ‘Anvāhārya fee’ for the Ancestors; and the sense of the
metaphor is that the Pitṛs are as much pleased on receiving the
*śrāddha-ofterings* as the Priests are on receiving the fee. This name
serves to indicate that the *śrāddha* is performed for the Pitṛs. But
the relation in which the Ancestors stand to the *śrāddha* is not the
same in which the Deities stand to the *Darśa* and other sacrifices; as
the *śrāddha* is performed for their benefit; and it is in this sense
that we have the genitive case in ‘*pitṛṛṇām* (*pitṝṇām*?)’; if the
Pitṛs were the ‘deities,’ then there would be no reason for the omitting
of the Dative affix.

Another reading giving a totally different sense is ‘*piṇḍānām
māsikam*.’

‘*The wise call Anvāhārya*’— This also indicates the obligatory
character of the *Pitṛ-yajña* (which is as necessary as the sacrificial
gift); but with this difference that it is not a mere subordinate factor
(as the sacrificial fee is).

‘*It should be performed with such meat as has been comended*’—*i.e*.,
not prohibited, or particularly recommended; as in 268, where it is said
‘with the meat of fish the Ancestors remain satisfied for two months,
etc., etc.’

This is the principal method; in the absence of meat, curds, butter,
milk, cakes, etc., shall be offered, as is going to be prescribed later
on.

The meat, however, is only the sauce for the seasoning of such food as
cooked rice and the like; it does not consti-tute a food by itself,
since the text is going to describe ‘such subsidiaries us soup and
vegetables, etc.’ (226), and also ‘on what kinds of food, etc.’ (next
verse).—(123)

The question that arises now is that the *śrāddha* consisting of the
several acts of (*a*) oblations in fire, (*b*) feeding of Brāhmaṇas,
(*c*) offering of hulls of food, and so forth,—are they all equally
principal and expressible by the name ‘*śrāddha*?’ Or, some are
principal and some secondary? The answer is that, in view of suoh
expressions as—‘one should feed Brāhmaṇas in *śrāddha*,’ ‘this man has
eaten at the *śrāddha*,’ and so forth, where ‘feeding’ and ‘*śrāddha*’
are spoken of as synonyms,—the ‘feeding of Brāhmaṇas appears to be the
principal factor.’ To the same end our Author says—


