+++
title = "135 ज्ञाननिष्ठेषु कव्यानि"

+++
Though as a rule each subject should be propounded in the same order in
which it has been mentioned before,—and according to this the *persons
to be fed* should have been described first,—yet the present verse
describes their *number* first; because there is very little to be said
on this point.

With reference to the gods, one should feed two Brāhmaṇas, and at the
rite performed in honour of the Pitṛs he should feed three; ‘*or one at
each of the two*’—*i.e*., one at the rite in honour of the Gods and one
at that in honour of the Pitṛs.

Though the word used in the Text is ‘*pitṛ*,’ which shows that the
entity to whom the offering is to be made is the *Father*, yet, as a
matter of fact, the offering is to be made to the Father, grandfather
and great-grandfather. Hence, at the *śrāddha*, one should food one
Brāhmaṇa for each of these three,—and not one only for all three;
because each of them constitutes a distinct ‘recipient of offering.’
Says the author of the *Gṛhyasūtra* (Āśvnlāyana, 4. 7.2-4)—‘Not only one
for all; it has been explained by means of the balls;’ that is, just as
only one ball is not offered to all, so only one Brāhmaṇa should not be
fed for all. Here also the author will say later on—‘he should invite at
least three;’ and the invitation there spoken of is for the purpose of
feeding them, and not for the purpose of any merely transcendental
result. It is for this reason that at the rite in honour of ancestors
one should feed three,—that is, three times three, specially as it has
been declared that ‘one should not feed the least number.’ This same
explanation *applies also to what is said below (in 129*) regarding the
feeding ‘even one learned person at each;’ which means that one for each
of the three ancestors.

Further, the words ‘*or only one at each of the two*’ does not contain
an injunction; it is only a reiteration made for the propose of
introducing the prohibition of ‘large company;’ just as we have in the
statement—‘eat poison, do not eat in his house.’

“If that be so, then the assertion ‘he should feed two at the rite in
honour of the gods’ also may not be an injunction; as this also could be
explained as subservient to something else. If, however, this be
regarded as an Injunction, on the ground that what it says is not
knowable from any other source,—then, why cannot the statement ‘one at
each’ also be an Injunction?”

The answer to this is that neither of the two statements may be regarded
as an Injunction.

“Whence, then, could we know the number (to be fed)?”

From the assertion—‘he should invite at least three.’

“But in that passage there is no mention of the rite in honour of the
gods.”

Well, in that case, we can learn the number from another *Smṛti*:—‘an
odd number, according to one’s enthusiasm,’ ‘an even number at the rite
in honour of the gods’ (Yājñavalkya, *ācāra*, 227).

Further, if the present verse contained an Injunction of the number to
be fed, then, since there would be no possibility of any idea arising
regarding the ‘large company,’ the prohibition of it would be absolutely
uncalled for.

From all this it follows that only so many Brāhmaṇas should be fed, by
feeding whom one would not fall into those difficulties that might arise
from the feeding of too many men. That is, at the rite in honour of the
ancestors, an odd number, and at that in honour of the gods, only two.

Even when the man is extremely wealthy,—very rich,—‘*he should, not
indulge in large company*.’—(125)

This prohibition of feeding a very large number is not with a view to
any transcendental result. In fact—


