+++
title = "140 यः सङ्गतानि"

+++
‘*Friendships*’—friendly relations—he ‘*who make*’ ‘*by means of
Śrāddhas*’ ‘*through folly*—*i.e*., being ignorant of what is contained
in the scriptures,—*falls from heaven*,’—*i.e*., never reaches heaven;
the root ‘fall’ being used in the sense of *want of connection* in
general; the sense being ‘just as a man on reaching heaven and falling
from there loses all connection with it, so this man also.’ What is
meant is that the man does not obtain the reward for performing the
*śrāddha*. in this sense alone can the passage have any connection with
all that has gone in the present context.

‘*Having the. śrāddha for his friend*;’—the *śrāddha* is spoken of as
his friend, on account of its being the means of his acquiring a friend,
it is in this sense that we have the Bahuvrīhi compound in
‘*śrāddhamitra*.’

‘*The meanest of twice-born men*;’—the ‘twice-born men’ have been
mentioned only by way of illustration; in reality, the *Śūdra* also
should not feed friends at *śrādḍhas*.

“The mere fact of the Śūdra being a *non-Brāhmaṇa* makes it impossible
for him to feed a friend at *śrāddhas* (where only Brāhmaṇas are fed).”

But who has laid down the rule that Brāhmaṇas cannot be the friends of
Śūdras?

“As a matter of fact, it is only persons of the same caste that are
regarded as *friends*; so that there could be no friendship between
persons, one of whom belongs to the higher and the other to the lower
caste.”

This also is not true; since Śvetaketu, the son of Aruṇi, is declared to
have said—‘In the Pañcāla country, there is a *Kṣatriya* friend of
mine.’

Then again, it has already been explained that the term ‘friend’ in the
present context has been used as connoting *relationship* in general.
And Brāhmaṇas also come to have pecuniary relations with *Śūdras*; and
to the *Pāraśavaśūdra* (the Śūdra born of a Brāhmaṇa father and a
*Śūdra* mother), Brāhmaṇas hear even blood-relationships.—(140)


