+++
title = "141 साभिहिता पैशाची"

+++
‘*Anṛcām (Anṛcām?*)’, ‘*ignorant of the Veda*,’—those who do not know
the meaning of the Vedic verses.

This is only by way of illustration; since there is no possibility of
persons ignorant of the Veda being fed; because of the restriction that
the food shall be offered only to one learned in the Veda. The affix at
the end of this compound has been dropped because of the term being
Vedic, and also because of the exigencies of metre. They say—‘one had
better read *maṣa* in place of *māṣa* rather than distort the metre.’

Or, we may read ‘*anṛcā*’ in the Nominative Plural; the construction
being ‘thousand persons ignorant, &c.;’ just as we have the phrase
‘thousand bulls.’

‘*A single man learned in the Veda*’—knowing the meaning of the Veda—‘on
*being satisfied*’—*i.e*., fed—‘absorbs all those’ ignorant persons;
*i.e*., becomes identified with them; and in face of this identity, the
result that might accrue from the feeding of those thousands would be
obtained by the feeding of a single learned man; this is the sense got
at. from the text.

This deprecation of the ignorant person is meant to be a praise of the
learned man; and it does not really mean that the feeding of a single
man produces results equal to those produced by feeding a thousand.
Further, inasmuch as the scriptures lay down the feeding of the learned
only, there is no possibility of the ignorant ever being fed. It may be
that people might think that, in the absence of the fully learned man
(thoroughly versed in the Veda), the feeding of the man⁽learned in the
Veda’ (who is comparatively *ignorant*) laid down in verse 128 above
permits, under certain conditions, the feeding of ignorant persons also;
and in view of this, for the purpose of preventing the prohibition of
feeding a ‘large company’ from applying to the case of ignorant persons
also, the present text may be taken in its direct sense (whereby the
feeding of thousands of ignorant persons is permitted).—(131)


