+++
title = "144 कामं श्राद्धे"

+++
The text proceeds to divide the qualities of men, for the purpose of
indicating the superiority of learning; and this also tor the purpose of
pointing out the propriety of making gifts to the learned.

Persons possessing excellence in ‘learning’—knowledge—are said to ‘excel
in learning,’—*i.e*., devoted to learning.

The sense desired to be conveyed justifies the Bahuvrīhi compound even
between non-appositional terms. Persons, who have studied the Veda and
its meaning and are always intent upon it, are said to ‘*excel in
learning*.’

This same explanation applies to all the terms ending with the term
‘*niṣṭhā*.’

The compound ‘*tapassvādhyāyaniṣṭhāḥ*’ is *Bahuvrīhi*, containing within
itself a copulative compound. ‘*Austerities*’—such as the *Cāndrāyaṇa*,
and the rest;—‘*vedic study*,’ is learning of the Veda.

‘*Rites*’ —*Agnihotra*, and the rest.

It has to be borne in mind that all these qualities are meant to coexist
together; the presence of any one of them only, in the absence of the
others, does not make a man a fit recipient of the gift; all that the
text describes is the fact of some men excelling in one and some in
another. That such is the meaning is indicated by the fact that the term
‘*niṣṭhā*,’ which denotes *finishing*, is indirectly indicative of
*excelling*; and when a person excels in, is intent upon, some one
quality, he is said to ‘excel’ in that. When a man is possessed of all
the good qualities, but one of those is possessed in a superior degree,
and the others in lesser degree, then also the man is a fit recipient;
but if he does not possess anyone quality in a superior degree, even
though he may possess all the qualities, he is not a fit recipient.

That a combination of all the qualities is necessary, is shown by what
has been said in the second discourse to the effect that ‘one who is
devoid of learning cannot rightly perform any rites.’

Others have explained the term ‘*jñānaniṣṭha*’ to mean the *Renunciate*,
on the ground that ‘devotion to self-knowledge’ has been specially
prescribed for him after he has renounced the performance of all rites;
(under this explanation) the term ‘*taponiṣṭha*’ would stand for *the
Recluse*; he being called ‘*tāpasa*’ ( devoted to austerities); as in
such assertions as ‘during the summer the Recluse should perform the
five austerities’ (6. 23);—and the term ‘*tapaḥsvādhyāyaniṣṭha*’ would
stand for the *Student*;—and ‘*karmaniṣṭha*’ for the *Householder*.
According to this explanation, the persons whose feeding is prohibited
are those that are outside the pale of the four ‘stages;’ say the
Paurāṇikas—‘the Śrāddha should not be offered to persons outside the
pale of the four stages.’—(134)


