+++
title = "147 एष वै"

+++
Having raised the question as to which is superior of the two—one whose
father is illiterate, but he himself is ‘*thoroughly versed in the
Veda*,’ *i.e*., who has read the Veda along with the subsidiary
sciences,—and the other whose father is thoroughly versed in the Veda,
but he himself is illiterate,—the author now sets forth the established
conclusion.

‘*Of these two*’—between one who is himself learned in the Veda, but his
father is illiterate, and one who is himself illiterate, but his father
is learned in the Veda—one should know him to be ‘superior’—more
praiseworthy—who is himself illiterate, but his father is learned in the
Veda.

‘*The other...... for the sake of the veneration due to the Veda*’—He is
to be honoured, not because he is a Brāhmaṇa, but because he has learnt
the Vedic Mantras, which have to be honoured; and since the honouring of
the Veda has not been prescribed in connection with *Śrāddhas*, such a
person does not deserve to be fed at these.

What the author does by means of these two verses, propounding us they
do a question and its answer, is to indicate, through a laudatory
description, that what entitles a man to eat at *Śrāddhas* is the fact
of his father being learned in the Veda, and that of himself being
learned in the Veda (the two combined). The mere fact of he himself
being learned in the Veda, does not entitle him to *the eating, nor the
fact of his father being learned in* the Veda, while he himself is
illiterate.

It is with reference to this that it has been said above (in 130) that
‘one should examine the Brāhmaṇa from far off etc.;’ and the examination
of ‘*learning*’ there mentioned refers to enquiries concerning the
learning of both father and son; while those relating to *caste* and
*qualif* *ications*, these have to be extended to higher ancestors also.
And since it is this distinction that is sought to be brought out in
this verse, it cannot be regarded as a needless repetition.—(137)
