+++
title = "151 जटिलञ् चाऽनधीयानम्"

+++
‘*One with braided hair*’—*i.e*., the Student; this arrangement of the
hair has been laid down as an optional alternative for him—‘he should
either shave his head or wear his hair in braids’ (2-219); the ‘braided
hair’ is mentioned here only as an indicative of the Student; hence the
present verse includes also that student who may have shaved his head.
And the student whose feeding is prohibited here is only *one who is not
studying*.

“In view of what has been said above in regard to the propriety of
feeding one who is learned in the Veda (128), there can be no
possibility of anyone feeding a man *who is not studying* (why then
should his feeding be specially prohibited?)”

The prohibition is necessary, as otherwise one might feed the student
who began his study, but did not carry it on and did not learn the Veda.

“But it has been said above (145) that one should feed him who is
‘*thoroughly versed in the Veda*;’ where, then, could there be any
possibility of the admission of one who had only made a beginning of
study?”

In that case, we shall take the prohibition as applying to that student
who may have read through the Veda, without having made it all his own.

Or, the phrase ‘*who is not learned*’ may be taken as added to guard
against the contingency that, on the strength of what is said (in 3,
234) regarding the propriety of feeding the daughter’s son, even though
he he still in the state of studentship, some people might be led to
think the only necessary qualification consisted in the person invited
being the ‘daughter’s son,’ and ‘learning’ was not an essential
condition at all. And when the student¹ who is not studying’ becomes
precluded, it naturally follows that the student who is studying is
entitled to be fed.

‘*Durrāla*;’—this term may mean either one whose hair have fallen off,
or one who is red-haired, or one who is without hair in his private
parts. In this sense, they explain the etymology of the word as
follows:—‘mere grass suffices for his clothing, he is covered by mere
grass, having no clothing, ho hides his private parts with mere grass,’

^(‘)*Gambler*’— who is addicted to gambling.

^(‘)*Who* *sacrifice* *for hosts*’— for groups of men. The collective
performance of the I *Vrātyastoma* for a number of *Vrātyas* has been
prescribed: and officiating at such sacrifices has been prohibited under
II. 197.

Our explanation, however, is that the phrase applies to one who may
sacrifice, even by turns, for many persons:—*i.e*., who undertakes
service as priest very frequently:—such a person also shall not be fed.
Says Vaśiṣṭha—‘He who sacrifices for many men, and he who initiates many
persons.’

Some people hold that, since the present verse specifies
the^(‘)*Śrāddha*,’ the interdict herein contained pertains only to rites
in honour of the Pitṛs, not to those in honour of the gods.

This, however, is not right. Because the rites in honour of the gods
(*Viśvedevas*) are also a part of the ‘*Śrāddha*,’ which latter term
therefore can be used in connection with these also.—(151)


