+++
title = "155 कुशीलवो ऽवकीर्णी"

+++
The three terms—‘*thoroughly versed in the Veda*,’ ‘*who has finished
the entire recesional text*’ and ‘*who has reached the end of it*’—are
synonymous; everyone of them denotes *persons who have learnt the whole
recensional text, including the Mantra as well as the Brāhmaṇa*; not
those who have learnt either the *Mantra-text* alone or the *Brāhmaṇa-*
text alone, or only a portion of these. The name ‘*śrotriya*,’ ‘learned
in the Veda,’ is Applied, to even those who have learnt only a part of
the Veda; hence the three terms in the present verse have been used for
the purpose of excluding the mere ‘*śrotriya*.’ In regard to this
latter, it has been said (in 128) that ‘the offering should be given to
the *śrotriya*;’ the term ‘*śrotriya*’ means ‘one learned in the
*Veda*;’ and the term ‘*veda*’ denotes the entire recensional text,
including the *Mantra* and the *Brāhmaṇa*, as also a part of these.
Consequently, for the purpose of referring to one who has learnt the
*entire* ṛecensional text, the Text 1ms used the terms in question.

“It has been laid down above (134-135) that one shall feed only such
persons as belong to one or the other *stage*; and until one has learnt
the entire Vedic text, it is not possible for one to cuter upon the
state of the Householder; as it has been asserted that ‘the entire Veda
should be learnt’ (2.165).”

But even so, it would he open to one to feed the Student who has begun
to learn the Veda,—even before he has finished it. Hence all the three
synonymous terms—‘thoroughly versed in the Veda,’ ‘who has finished the
entire recensional text,’ and ‘who has reached the end of it’—indicate
that the *whole* Veda should have been learnt.

Though only one of these words would have sufficed for the purpose, yet
the Author has made use of several forms of the same expression in view
of metrical exigencies.

‘*Vedapāragah*,’ ‘*Thoroughly versed in the Veda*,’—who has *gone
through* the entire Veda.

‘*Śākhāntagaḥ*’ ‘*who has finished the entire recensional text*’— the
end of the recensional text.

‘*Samāptikaḥ*,’—‘who has reached the end of it.’

‘*Adhvaryu*,’ ‘*adherent of the Yajurveda*’—one who has studied the
Yajurveda; this term is not used here as the name of one of the
principal sacrificial priests. ‘*Ādhvargava*’ is the name given to the
act of reciting; hence the person connected with this act is called
‘*Adhvaryu*.’

‘*Chāndoga*,’ ‘*adherent of the Sāmaveda*,’—one who studies the
Sāmaveda.

In another *Smṛti*, it is the person who has learnt the ‘three
thousands’ that has been called ‘*samāptika*;’ and the term ‘thousand’
here denotes the *Sāmaveda*, by reason of its being related to a
thousand musical forms.; and one. whose learning consists of *three* of
these ‘*thousand*’ is ‘one who has learnt the three thousands;’ the
*three* forms being (I) the

‘*Tāṇḍava*’ (Texts relating to Dancing), (2) the ‘*Aukthikya*’ (Texts
relating to the *Ukthas*) and (2) the ‘*Sāmagāna*’ (the singing of Sāmu
verses); these are the three ‘sciences’ of the Sāmaveda, of which there
are a thousand recensions.

The ‘*Ṛgveda*’ stands for the Saṃhitā text of ten *Maṇḍalas* divided
into sixty-four *adhyāyas* and the Brāhmaṇa.

Others have explained this verse as excluding the adherents of the
Atharva Veda from being fed. (They argue that) if the author had
intended to include all the Vedas, he would have simply said—‘one should
feed that Brāhmaṇa who has learnt the entire recensional text of the
Veda.’

“The same argument might be urged against the verse being taken as
excluding the adherent of the Atharva Veda: if this exclusion had been
intended, the Author could have simply said—‘the adherent of the Atharva
Veda shall not be fed.’ Such a statement would be very much simpler and
a more direct way of laying down the exclusion.”

There is no force in this; as Munu’s way of teaching Dharma is diverse:
sometimes he leaves the negation to be implied by means of an
affirmation, and at others he puts the negation directly in its own
words.—(145).


