+++
title = "157 अकारणे परित्यक्ता"

+++
He who, in the absence of any cause, forsakes his Mother, Father and
Preceptor. The term ‘*guru*,’ ‘superior’ here being used in its general
sense, includes the Teacher also.

Some people argue that—“in that case (if ‘guru ’ *stands* for the
*superior* in general), the Father and the Mother need not have been
mentioned, these also being included under the term ‘*guru*; for this
reason, this term ‘*guru*’ should be taken as standing for the Preceptor
only.”

This, however, is not right. If the ‘father’ and ‘mother’ wore not
specifically mentioned, then the term ‘superior’ would stand for the
father only, by the law of the ‘natural and artificial’ \[*i.e*., where
both are possible, the *natural* one is to be given the preference, and
the Father is the *natural* superior, while the Teacher is only an
*artificial* one\]. When, however, these two are mentioned separately,
then it becomes clear that the term ‘superior’ has been used in its most
general sense; specially in view of what other scriptures have said
regarding the Teacher being ‘the best of superiors.’

Reasons for forsaking these superiors are such as are mentioned in the
text—‘one should forsake one’s father, if one has injured the king,’ and
so forth.

The ‘forsaking’ of one’s parents means omitting to wash and shampoo
their feet and to do such other services, *i.e*., being inattentive to
their service. Similarly, with the Teacher, in whose case going for
study to another teacher, while one’s teacher is capable of teaching
one, also constitutes ‘forsaking.’

‘*Who has formed connection with outcasts’—i.e*., established
relationship with them.

‘*Through the Veda’—i.e*., by officiating at their sacrifices, by
teaching them, and so forth.

‘*Through marriage*,’—*i.e*., by giving his daughter in marriage to
them, and so forth.

“The man who forms such connection, would himself become an outcast; and
it would he as an outcast himself that he would be avoided at rites.”

In answer to this, some people say, in view of what is said below (290)
regarding a man becoming an¹ outcast’ by associating with outcasts *for
one gear*, that the present prohibition should be taken as pertaining to
the time before the lapse of the twelve months.

“What is this peculiar form of expression—*formed a connection through
relationship*?’”

As a matter of fact, the term ‘*samyoga*,’ ‘*connection*’ is not used
here in the sense of ‘conjunction,’ according to the usage of the
*Vaiśeṣikas*; it is the *act* itself that is called ‘connection,’ by
reason of its being the *cause* of connection. In connection with the
acts of ‘officiating at sacrifices’ and the like, the term ‘connection’
indicates and stands for mere relationship in general.—(157)


