+++
title = "159 पित्रा विवदमानश्"

+++
He who quarrels with his father; *i.e*., talks rudely to him; and goes
to court against him as party to a suit instituted for partition. Says
Gautama (15-19)—‘Those who separate from their Father, without reason.’

Why should this be asserted here, which appears to be a repetition of
what has been mentioned above (153) as the ‘opposer of his Teacher’?”

*Opposing* is one thing, and *quarrelling* is something different. When
the superior wants a certain thing, if one were to say rudely, ‘How can
this be got!,’—this is ‘opposing;’ so that one is an ‘opposer, by
obstructing his acquisition of a thing that belongs to him. Further,
under 153 ‘*pratirāddhā*’ is another reading (for ‘*pratiroddhā*’),
which means ‘doing direct injury,’ *i.e*., striking the superior with
slaps, &c. And with this reading what has gone before (in 153) is
clearly different from the ‘quarrelling’ mentioned here.

‘*Keeper of a gambling house*’—the gamester who makes other people
gamble; he who is himself a gambler has been already excluded before (in
151),

Some people read ‘*Kekara*’ (for ‘*Kitava*’), reading the text as
‘*Kekaro madyapastathā*;’ and ‘*Kekara*’ is the man with a squint.

Others, again, read ‘*Kātara*,’ which means ‘one, the pupils in whose
eyes are like the parrot’s feather, green.’

‘*Drunkard*’—one who drinks wines of kinds other than the ‘*Surā*’ (wine
distilled from grains); such, for instance, as the ‘*Ariṣṭa*,’ and the
like;—the drinker of ‘*Surā*’ being already precluded as an ‘outcast.’

‘*One afflicted with a fold disease*’—*i.e*., the leper; he being very
much despised among people, it is only right that he should be spoken of
as ‘afflicted with a foul disease.’

It is on account of the present prohibition that the term *yakṣmi* (in
154) has been taken (by some people) not as the ‘invalid’ in general,
but one who is suffering from consumption; if the ‘invalid’ in general
were meant, then all invalids being included there, the author would not
have mentioned ‘one afflicted with a foul disease’ in this verse.

‘*Accused of sins*.’—one who is known among people as having committed
sins, great and small; even without its being known for a certain.

‘*Hypocrite*.’—one who deceitfully performs religious acts, with a view
to gaining popularity, not because he thinks it his duty to do so.

‘*Dealer in essence*.’—*i.e*., the seller of poison; it is poison that
is called ‘Essence.’ In several places, we find the *poisoner* spoken of
as ‘*rasadaḥ*’ ‘giver of *essence*—(159)


