+++
title = "164 श्वक्रीडी श्येनजीवी"

+++
The term ‘*yakṣmī*’ stands here for the *invalid* in general. Some peope
take it as standing for *one suffering from consumption*.

‘*Cattle-tender*’— he who, stick in hand, tends cattle as a profession.

‘*Nirākṛti*,’ ‘*who neglects the Great Sacrifices*,’—one who, though
entitled to perform the Great Sacrifices, fails, to perform them. Even
now-a-days, one who fails to perform the Great Sacrifices, and is, on
that account, regarded as incapable of being served,’ is called
‘*Nirākṛti*.’ Thus we read in the *Śatapatha*—‘ one who worships neither
gods, nor ancestors nor men.’

Some people quote the definition that—‘the man devoid of Vedic study,
learning and wealth is called *Nirākṛti*;’ but these people are ignorant
of the right meaning of words; because the person mentioned in this
definition can have no connection with the present context, which deals
exclusively with ‘persons learned in the Veda.’ If the term ‘*Nirākṛti*’
is taken iii the sense of ‘the derider, *Nirākartā*, of gods, etc.,’
then there is. some compatibility with the literal signification of the
root; and even though the term ends with the abstract affix, ‘*ktin*,’
and as such is an abstract noun denoting a *quality*, yet its use in the
sense of the person having that quality may be justified on the
principle that there is no difference between the *quality* and *one
possessing the quality*.

Then again, the root in the term ‘*Nirākṛti*,’ when preceded by ‘*ni*,’
signifies *exclusion*: people who are excluded are said to be
‘*Nirākṛta*;’ as we find in such expressions as ‘*Nirākṛta*, excluded,
from dinner,’ ‘*Nirākṛta*, excluded, from title,’ and so forth. Thus
*non-exclusion* would be ‘*ākrti*,’ ‘invitation;’ and one from whom this
has been set aside, would be ‘*Nirākṛti*.’

Further, ‘*ākṛti*’ also means *configuration*; the prefix ‘*ni*’ having
the sense of *reprehensibilty*, the term may be taken as excluding the
ill-figured person. It has been declared that (one should feed) ‘one who
is endowed with speech, beauty, age and diameter:’ here ‘endowed with
speech’ means *eloquent, of powerful speech*; but the man who is
garrulous should not be fed; ‘*endowed with beauty*’ means *having a
beautiful body and limbs*; ‘endowed with age’ means what Gautama (15.10)
has said in regard to ‘the feeding of older men before youths,’

Lastly, the term ‘*Nirākṛti*’ may be taken as ending in ‘*ktich*,’ and
being a proper name,

‘*One who is inimical to Brahman*’—one who hates Brāhmaṇas, or the Veda;
the term ‘*Brahman*’ denoting both (Brāhmaṇa and Veda); when, for
instance, it is said that ‘the Brāhmaṇa also is called *Brahman*.’

‘*Company*’—corporation; those, who subsist conjointly upon one means of
livelihood, are spoken of by the name ‘com *pany*;’ and those Brāhmaṇas
who are members of such a company.

‘*One who has superseded his elder brother*’ and ‘*one who has been
superseded by his younger brother*’—these are going to be described
later on.—(154)


