+++
title = "166 औरभ्रिकोपूर्वा-पतिस् तथा"

+++
‘*One who teaches for a stipulated fee*’— one who teaches only while be
is engaged on a fee; one who undertakes the work of teaching after
having made the stipulation that ‘if you pay me so much, I shall teach
you the Veda,’ is called ‘one who teaches for a stipulated fee.’ Such is
the form of payment known among bearers and others. If, however, without
having verbally stipulated that one would receive a certain amount of
money, one does the work of teaching and receives payment afterwards,
then such a teacher is not ‘one who teaches for a stipulated fee.’ In
fact, teaching in return for payment of an amount not previously
stipulated, has been actually sanctioned.

Similarly, ‘*one who is taught by one who teaches for a stipulated
fee*;’ this is the name given to one who *himself*, like Satyakāma, pays
a stipulated fee and then reads with the teacher. The boy, however, who,
in the absence of any other teacher, is put by his father and others
under the tuition of one who is paid a stipulated fee, is not regarded
as ‘of reprehensible practice.’ Because it is for the father to save the
boy from all that is prohibited. It has been declared (in 8.317)—‘The
pupil and the sacrificer transmit their guilt to the Teacher.’

‘*The pupil of a Śūdra*’— in the learning of Grammar and other Sciences.

‘*Teacher*’—of the Śūdra, Though the term ‘*śūdra*,’ forms the
subordinate factor in the compound ‘*śūdraśiṣya*,’ yet it is construed
with the following word; such construction being permissible in works on
*Smṛti*. Then again, the condition of being ‘reprehensible practice’ is
a qualification that governs all that is said here, and it is only the
teaching of the Śūdra. that is reprehensible, not the teaching of any
other higher caste.

‘*Reprehensible in speech*’—*i.e*., rude and untruthful of speech.
Others explain this to mean ‘one who is accused of a serious offence.’

‘*The son of an adulteress and the son of a widow*’—to be described
later on (174),—(156).


