+++
title = "170 अव्रतैर् यद्"

+++
He who, as a professional artisan, makes bows and arrows.

‘*Agredidhiṣūpatiḥ*;’—the term ‘*didhiṣū*’ is connected both ways, like
the single eye-ball of the crow operating in both sockets. Such a
construction is permissible, because the text belongs to the category of
a ‘*snmṛti-śātra*.’ Even (meaningless) lines and clods of earth are made
to yield some meaning, in consideration of the requirements of *Smṛtis*;
and they come out useful too. For this reason, the objection need not be
raised as to how a single term occurring in the middle of a compound can
be construed with two different terms. In fact. Gautama (15.16) has
expressly prohibited both (The ‘*agredidhiṣū*’ and the ‘*didhiṣūpati*’),
and this indicates the plausibility of the above construction; and the
compound really contains two terms. Further, there is no such person as
‘*agredidhiṣūpati*.’ The definition of these two (‘*agredidhiṣū* and
*didhiṣūpatī*’) will he supplied later on.

‘*Who injures a friend*’—who puts obstacles in a friend’s business.

‘*Who subsists* *by gambling*’—The man for whom gambling is the means of
subsistence.

“Such a person has already been mentioned in the preceding verse.”

But the person who helps people to gamble (The ‘keeper of a gambling
house, mentioned before) is not necessarily one who makes a living by
it; in fact, it is one who himself does not know gambling, or who does
not do it through fear of his elders; hut, being addicted to it as an
amusement, he always makes others gamble; and it is for excluding this
kind of man that we had the second ‘*Kitava*’ (in the preceding verse;
the word ‘*Kitava*’ having been first included in verse 151).

Or, the term ‘*dyūtavṛtti*’ may stand for those who, without any money
themselves, are constant dummy visitors at gambling places.

He whose son is his *teacher*; it is not possible for the son to be his
father’s ‘*ācārya*’ in the real sense of this term.—(160)


