+++
title = "173 भ्रातुर् मृतस्य"

+++
He who, acting in accordance with the law of ‘*Niyoga*,’ should happen
to make love to—take delight in intercourse with—the wife of his dead
brother;—‘*lasciviously*’—*i.e*., in transgression of the exact form of
‘*Niyoga*,’—*i.e*., renouncing the injunction that ‘one should have
intercourse with his brother’s wife only *once* during her periods,’—if
he should have recourse, at will, to such advances as cousist in firm
embrace, kissing, and so forth,—or if he should have intercourse with
her more than once,—or even allow his mind to be inclined that
way,—then, such a person, impressed with the mark of passion by such
signs, as casting longing glances upon the woman, and so forth, is to be
known as the ‘*didhiṣūpati*.’

The exact definition of the ‘*agredidhiṣūpati*’ is to be learnt from
another *Smṛti*, which says—‘when the brother is alive, the man is to be
known as the *agredidhiṣūpati*.’

Some people have held that the present verse does not form part of the
text at all; and as a reason for this, they urge the fact of its being
incomplete. It being necessary to provide definitions of both (the
*didhiṣūpati* and the *agredidhiṣūpati*), it is not possible for authors
who know their business to provide the definition of only one of them;
specially, as another *Smṛti* has provided the definitions of
both:—(*a*) ‘the wise men regard him as *didhiṣūpati*, who is the
husband of a woman who has had a previous husband; and (*b*) that
Brāhmaṇa is to be regarded as the *agredidhiṣūpati* of whom that woman
was the wife;’—and

these definitions are not applicable to the present context (which might
have justified the omission by our author); as (the husband of a woman
who has had a previous husband’ has been excluded already before (in
verse 160). Hence the ‘*didhiṣūpati*’ must be different from the one
defined as such in the passage just quoted (from another *Smṛti*).—(173)


