+++
title = "168 यावतः संस्पृशेद्"

+++
This is re-iterated in the present verse, in order to indicate that,
just as the thief and the rest are ‘defilers of the company,’ so equally
blameworthy is the unlearned Brāhmaṇa also.

Others offer the following explanation:—The present verse is intended to
indicate the occasional admissibility, to the offerings for gods, of
such blind and other disabled, but learned, Brāhmaṇas as happen, at some
particular time, to be free from any reprehensible practice; the sense
of the text being—‘The unlearned Brāhmaṇa should be avoided, but why
should not the offering be not presented to one who is learned?’ It is
for this reason that the text mentions the ‘offering *for gods*’ So that
what is meant is that, at the offering to gods, it is only the
*unlearned* Brāhmaṇa that should be excluded, while those whose
practices are reprehensible, and are on that account distinctly debarred
by a direct prohibition, should be excluded from *both* the offering to
gods and that to pitṛs,—and only from that to ancestors. Vaśiṣṭha has
said: ‘If a person learned in the Veda happen to be stigmatised by such
bodily defects as are regarded as defiling the company, such a person
Yama declares to be unblameworthy; in fact, such a person is a
sanctifier of the company.’

‘*Becomes quenched in the same manner as the fire of dry grass*;’—The
fire of dry grass cannot cook the sacrificial offerings, and it becomes
quenched as soon as the offering is thrown into it, and also becomes
extinguished; anything offered into it does not become burnt to ashes;
and hence such an offering becomes futile; since it has been laid down
that ‘one should not pour libations into fire that is not burning
brightly, the fire embodies all deities;’—exactly of the same *nature*
as the fire of dry grass is the unlearned Brāhmaṇa. This is what the
text means by the words ‘*As no libations are poured on ashes*;’ just as
the fire of dry gross becomes turned into ash before (burning the
offerings), and people do not pour libations into such fire, similarly,
the unlearned Brahman is not fed.—(168)


