+++
title = "181 यत् तु"

+++
‘*Agraja*,’ ‘*elder brother*’—is the uterine brother born before one.
Thus has it been asserted—‘There is no harm in the superseding of the
uncle’s sons, the step-mother’s sons and the sons of other’s wives, by
marriage and the setting up of fire;’ hence, in the present context, the
term ‘elder brother’ stands for the uterine brother. While he
‘*remains*’—*i.e*., without marriage and without having set up the fire;
the root ‘*stkā*’ (in the term ‘*sthitê*’) has been used in the sense of
*the absence of the act mentioned*.

The term ‘*agnihotra*,’ though the name of the *act* of sacrifice,
stands for the *setting up of fire* for purposes of that act.

In another *smṛti*, we find an exception—‘the lunatic, the sinner, the
leper, the outcast, the eunuch and the consumptive need not be waited
for.’ What is mentioned here is meant to be indicative of the condition
in the form of the elder brother being in any way not entitled (to marry
and set up the fire). Hence the ‘defiler of company’ is also included.

A special period has also been specified during which one is to wait for
his elder brother to marry and set up the fire—‘one should wait for
eight years,’—‘some say for six years’ (*Gautama*, 18.19). This period
is to be reckoned from the time when the younger brother has reached the
age of marriage; and the age of marriage is the time when one has duly
fulfilled the injunction of Vedic Study.

“As a matter of fact, the period of time stated in the passage quoted
refers to the man who has gone out travelling. The passage quoted above
begins with the word ‘the elder brother being,’ which refers to the time
during which the elder brother is out on travel. \[So that it can have
no bearing upon *supersession* by marriage\].”

True; but the term ‘who has gone out on travel’ is distinctly found to
be connected with one sentence \[this sentence being ‘*pravrajite
nivṛttiḥ prasaṅgāt*, *Gautama*, 18.16\]; so that, for connecting the
same word with another sentence \[‘*bhrātari chaivam jyāyasi yavīyān*,
18.18\], some special reasons should be stated. There is, however, no
such reason; as there is in the case of such words as ‘there is
connection between this and the term *svarita*;’ no such words, however,
are found in the case of the sentences in question; nor is one sentence
incomplete without the connection of the word in question.

*Vaśiṣṭha* has used the generic term ‘fire and has, therefore, meant the
‘*Smārta*’ Fire.

Some people have held this definition of ‘superseder’ to apply also to
one whose father has not set up the Fire; the term ‘*agraja*,’ ‘elder,’
meaning simply ‘one born before one;’ so that the Father also is one’s
‘elder.’

In this manner, what is said here would apply to other ‘older’ persons
also; as a matter of fact, however, the terms ‘younger’ and ‘elder’ are
never used between father and son.

In another *Smṛti* we find—‘the elder *brother* being, etc., etc.’
(Gautama, 18.18. where the *Brother* is specifically mentioned).

The elder brother is called the ‘*superseded*’— (171)


