+++
title = "184 अग्र्याः सर्वेषु"

+++
While the husband is alive, if a son is born to his wife living in his
house, from a paramour tolerated by the forgiving nature of the
husband,—this son born of a stranger is called ‘*Kuṇḍa*.’

That born after the husband has died, is ‘*Golaka*.’

Some people have held that these names are given to sons born to the
woman not ‘appointed’ by her husband (to bear children).

This, however, is not right; as in that case their exclusion would be
secured by the more fact of their being *non-Brāhmaṇas*. Hence we
conclude that the ‘*Kuṇḍa*’ and the ‘*Golaka*’ are sons born to the
woman ‘appointed’ by her husband.

“But how is it that the eons born to the *unappointed* woman are
*non-Brāhmaṇas*, while those born to the *appointed* woman are
*Brāhmaṇas?*”

This follows from the fact that, in the definition of castes, the term
‘wife’ is mentioned: ‘In the case of all castes, one born of the *wife*
of the same caste, etc., etc.’ (10.5). This term ‘*wife*,’ like the term
‘*husband*,’ is a relative one; the term ‘wife,’ ‘*patnī*,’ again, has
been explained (*etymologically*) as *associated with one at sacrificial
performances*; and no man is entitled to perform.sacrifices in
association with another man’s wife.

“If that be so, then no *Brāhmaṇa-hood* should belong to the sons born
to the *appointed woman*, in whose case also the same reason is
applicable.”

This question we shall determine under Discourse 10 (verse 5).

Or, both—the sons of the appointed as well as those of the unappointed
woman—may be regarded as ‘non-Brāhmaṇas;’ but the difficulty is that, as
has been already pointed out above, if these persons are not Brāhmaṇas,
then, there being no possibility of these being admitted to dinners, any
prohibition of them would be altogether uncalled for. Specially, as
their exclusion would be secured by the exclusion of the ‘out-cast.’
Being an ‘out-cast’ consists in falling off from the duties of the
Brāhmaṇa; and as *eating at śrāddhas* is a duty of the Brāhmaṇa, such
feeding may- not be possible for the out-cast. And yet we find his
exclusion asserted in verse 150 above,—(174)


