+++
title = "185 त्रिणाचिकेतः पञ्चाग्निस्"

+++
‘*Triṇāciketa*’ is the name of a portion of the Yajurveda, beginning
with the words ‘*pītodakā jagdhatṛṇā*; and the man is called
‘*triṇāciketa*’ by the circumstance of his having learnt that portion.
Others, however, explain that there are certain observances prescribed
for those who are learning the *Tṛṇāciketa* Mantras; and the person who
has kept these observances is called ‘*Triṇāciketa*.’ Here also the term
is applied to the man only figuratively.

It should not be thought that merely this (fact of having learnt a
certain portion of the Veda) makes one a ‘Sanctifier of Company;’ what
is meant is, that when the other qualifications of being learned in the
Veda and the like are present, the circumstance here mentioned forms an
additional qualification as indicating the character of being a
‘Sanctifier of Company.’

‘*Five fires*,’ ‘*Pañcāgnividyā*,’ is the name of a certain teaching
occurring in the *Chāndogya Upaniṣad* (5.10.9), the reward whereof has
been described in the words ‘*stenohiraṇyasya*, etc.’ The man is also so
called by the circumstance of his having learnt the said teaching, as in
the case of the previous word.

Others have explained the term ‘*Pañcāgni*’ as ‘one maintains the five
fires,’—*i.e*., the three sacrificial fires, the social fire and the
domestic fire. Of these, the ‘social fire’ is that which is lighted in
many countries with large quantities of fuel, for the purpose of
relieving cold.

‘*Trisuparṇa*’ is the name of a *mantra* occurring in the *Taittirīya
Veda*, and also in the *Ṛgveda*, beginning with the words ‘*ye brāhmaṇās
trisuparṇam paṭhanti*; etc.’

The ‘*six-limbed science*’ is the Veda; one who has learnt this.

One who is born of a woman who has been married in the “Brāhma”
form,—*i.e*., who has been given to a bridegroom brought home by
invitation.

‘*One who sings the Jyeṣṭha Sāmas*;’—The ‘*Jyeṣṭhadohas*’ are
*Sāman-mantras* found in the *Āraṇyaka*; one who sings these is called
‘*Jyeṣṭhasāmaga*.’ Here also the man is so called by reason of his
singing the *Sāman* and keeping the observances in relation to it.—(185)


