+++
title = "186 वेदार्थ-वित् प्रवक्ता"

+++
‘*He who understands the meaning of the Veda*.’

“The *knower of the ‘six-limbed science*’ has already been mentioned.”

True; but the man meant here is one who himself, even without the help
of the Subsidiary Sciences, finds out the meaning of the Veda, by his
own intelligence. Or, the same person spoken of before may be taken as
referred to again and again; the meaning being that in the absence of
the knowledge of the meaning of the Veda, people are not deserving of
being fed at *Śrāddhas*, even though they may have other qualifications.

‘*One who expounds it*’—*i.e*., the meaning of the Veda.

‘*The, Student*.’

‘*The giver of a thousand*;’—in the absence of mention of any particular
thing, this should be taken to mean ‘*one who has given away* a
*thousand cows*.’ But the right view appears to be that the term,
‘*thousand*,’ standing for *much*, the person meant is one who gives
much, *i.e*., the extremely generous person; specially, as there is
nothing definite to indicate that the number refers to *cows*. But the
Veda having asserted that^(‘)cows are the mothers of sacrifice,’—where
no particular thing is mentioned—*cows* should be understood to be
meant.

‘*The centenarian*’—*i.e*., one who is of advanced age; such a person,
having all his impurities cleared off, acquires the sanctifying
character. The ‘*centenarian*’ is one whose life extends over a hundred
years; the number being taken, on the basis of usage, as referring *to
years*. Or, the term ‘hundred’ may be taken as standing for *many*, so
that the word means ‘long-lived,’ ‘of advanced age.’

Gautama (15.10-11) has declared that ‘gifts should first be made to
young men;—others say it is like the Father;’ and people have taken the
term ‘*Student*’ of the present verse as conveying this same idea; the
student being the person of ‘early age.’—(186)


