+++
title = "194 मनोर् हैरण्यगर्भस्य"

+++
‘*Hiraṇyagarbha*’ is Prajāpati; his son is ‘*Manu, the son of
Hiraṇyagarbha*;’ as has been declared under Discourse I—‘Having created
all this and myself, &c., &c.;’—of this Manu, the sons were ‘*Marīci and
the rest*’—*i.e*., Atri, Aṅgiras, and so forth; and these constitute the
‘Body of Pitṛs,’ ‘*Pitṛgaṇa*.’

An objection is raised—“For every person, his own Father, &c., are his
‘*Pitṛs*.’ The injunctions also are in the words—‘one should offer balls
to his father, grandfather and great-grandfather;’ ‘after this, the sons
should make offerings to three ancestors.’ What then is this that is
being said now—that ‘the sons oft he sages are the *Pitṛs*,’—or that
‘the *Somapās* are the Pitṛs of Brāhmaṇas?’ We cannot accept any such
option as that—‘one shall make an offering to the *Somapā*

Pitṛs,’ or ‘he shall make the offering to his father and grandfather;’
for the simple reason that in the original injunction we find the words
‘this should be done *by the son*;’ and ‘son’ is a relative term; and
later on (verse 221) we read—‘he whose father may be dead &c., &c.’ It
has, therefore, got to be explained what is the real meaning of the
present context,”

The answer to the above is as follows:—What the present verse contains
is merely a commendatory description supplementary to the foregoing
injunctions; and we never hear of the ‘*Somapa*’ and other Pitṛs spoken
as the recipients of offerings.

“But there is the injunction (in 193) that these *have to be
worshipped*.”

The root ‘*chara*’ (in ‘*upacaryāḥ*’) is denotative of mere *action* in
general; and as such, it cannot form the subject of any injunction. In
the Veda, we do not find any such action spoken of as ‘*upacāra*,’ in
the same manner as the acts of *sacrificing*, *giving* and the like. In
most cases, the root ‘*chara*’ is used, like the root ‘*kṛ*’ as
pertaining to some other *act* mentioned in close proximity to it; and
in the present case, the act mentioned in close proximity is that of
*offering the śrāddha*. This latter act having been already enjoined as
to be offered to a definite set of recipients, could not be again
enjoined as to be offered to other recipients. If it were again the
enjoined itself, then it would not be regarded as being in proximity to
another enjoined act; and the presence of the root ‘*chara*’ distinctly
precludes the possibility of any other act being understood, which is
not in proximity to another enjoined act. As for such usages in ordinary
parlance as ‘the Teacher should be worshipped,’ ‘*guravaḥ upacaryāh*’
(where we have the same term ‘*upacaryāḥ*’), there also the act that is
understood to be expressed is *service*, in the form of *washing the
feet*, and the like; and no such act as these is possible in connection
with the Pitṛs, And so long as a passage is capable of being construed
in a certain sense along with the context in which it occurs, there can
be no justification for assuming another meaning for it. If the
‘*Somapa*’ and the rest had been really intended as the recepients of
the *Śrāddha* offered by the several castes, then alone would there have
been any use for the description of their birth, &c. (as found in the
present verse). When, however, the verse is taken as a mere commendatory
description, then any description might come in useful.

Hence, the conclusion is, that the present verse proceeds with a view to
make those people undertake the performance of *Śrāddha* who may happen
to have no regard for their ancestors, and hence having no inclination
for doing any act on their behalf;—the purport being—‘do not you think
that the Pitṛs being dead men, what harm could they do if they were not
satisfied at the Śrāddha, or what good they could do by being
satisfied?—because they are, in reality, beings of tremendous power,
being the grandsons of Manu; who is the son of Hiraṇyagarbha, the lord
of the whole universe.’ It is for conveying this sense that the text has
used the term, ‘of the sages;’ which means that they are not ordinary
sons of Manu; it is those great sages, Marīci and the rest, who are
known as possessed of great powers; and it is of such sages that the
Pitṛs are the sons.

There are many people who would be led to the performance of *Śrāddhas*,
just by means of such laudatory descriptions.

Some people explain the verse to mean that “one should look upon the
Pitṛs as *Somapa* and the rest.

These, however, have to be disregarded; as there is no authority for any
such notion. We have no such assertion to this effect, as we have in
connection with the propriety of looking at the sun as *Brahman*.

Others, again, have offered the explanation that, what is meant is, that
the rule being that ‘offerings to the Pitṛs should be made after
pronouncing their *gotra* and name,’ and ‘*Somapā*,’ &c., are just the
names that have to be pronounced in connection with the several castes.

This also is not right; since the expression used is “*somapā nāma*,”
‘*by name* Somapā,’ these must be *names*, not *gotras*.

“But the term ‘name’ would be applicable also when these were *names* of
*gotras* only.”

If these were the names of *gotras*, then the two could not be in
apposition; the proper form would be, ‘*Somapā* is the *gotra* of the
Pitṛs,’ and not that ‘the Pitṛs are *Somapa*.’

“It is often found that the descendant is identified with his *gotra*,
and the name of the latter is applied to the former; *e.g*, in such
expressions as ‘Babhru is Mandu.’”

Our answer to this is as follows:—It has to be considered here what is
it that is called ‘gotra,’ As a matter of fact, the ‘*gotra*’ of a
family is its first progenitor who imparts his name to it, being the
most renowned person by virtue of his possessing such qualities as
learning, opulence, bravery, nobility and the like; and it is after him
that the family becomes named. Thus it is that among Brāhmaṇas and
others, there are sub-divisious of *gotras*. The personage whom his
descendants remember with such feelings as ‘we are the descendants of
such and such a person,’ would thus be the one after which that
particular family should be named. As a matter of fact, however, no men
are found to think of themselves as being ‘*Somapā*’ and thus regarding

‘*Somapā*’ as the name of their *gotra*;—in the manner in which people
regard the names of ‘Bhṛgu’, ‘Garga’ and

‘Gālaya.’ It is by these latter names that the *gotras* of Brāhmaṇas
should be known; as these are the principal *gotras*; the name ‘*gotra*’
applying to them by convention, and not by virtue of their fulfilling
the condition mentioned in the above-mentioned definition that ‘the
first progenitor, imparting his name to the family, is its *gotra*;’ in
fact, ‘*Bhṛgu*,’ &c., have been known as ‘*gotra*’ from beginningless
time, and their use in this sense is as much without beginning as the
use of the caste-names, ‘*Brāhmaṇa*,’ and the rest. Prior to Parāśara’s
birth, no Brāhmaṇas could have been named after him; hence, if the
‘*gotra*’ consisted in the first progenitor, &c., then the Veda (which
makes mention of Parāśara as *gotra*) would have a beginning in time.
Thus, then, since the use of the name ‘*gotra*’ is beginningless, it is
this ‘*gotra*’ that is to be used in the pouring of water-libations. The
persons imparting their names to families are not beginningless; they
are modern; and at a Vedic rite, so long as one can make use of eternal
names, there can be no justification for pronouncing names that have had
a beginning in time. For these reasons, what the Brāhmaṇa should do when
offering the libation of water, &c„ is to pronounce the appropriate
‘*gotra-* name’—such as ‘may this offering go to the *Gargya*,’ or ‘to
one belonging to the *Garga-gotra*’—and then pronounce the name of the
person.

Among the *Kṣatriya* and the other castes, however, there is no such
usage regarding *gotra*. These latter do not retain the memory of their
‘*gotra*’ in the same manner as the Brāhmaṇas do. Hence, for them, the
‘*gotra*’ must be something pertaining to this world; and it is for
these that the ‘*gotra*’ consists of the ‘first progenitor, the most
renowned, who imparts his name to the family:’ hence it is that they are
referred to in *Śrāddha*, *etc*., by this *gotra-name*, even though it
is one that has had a beginning in time. These, *Kṣatriya, etc*., are
not worthy of being called by such titles as ‘*Havirbhuk*,’ and the
like.

Some people have held that—“the offerings enjoined as to be made with
such expressions as ‘I am inviting the Somapās,’ ‘may this reach the
Somapās,’ and the like, are by those persons, the names of whose father
and other ancestors are unknown.”

This also is not right; as it has been distinctly laid down that ‘one
not knowing the names of one’s ancestors should make the offerings
simply with the words *to the father, to the grandfather*, and so
forth.’

Further, there might be some justification for having recourse to the
several explanations of this verse, only if it were absolutely
impossible to construe it as serving the purposes of a commendatory
description supplementary to the foregoing injunction. But so long as it
is possible to construe the verse along with what has gone before, it
cannot be right to take it as an isolated assertion by itself.—(194)


