+++
title = "202 राजतैर् भाजनैर्"

+++
‘*Vessels made of silver*’—those built entirely of silver. In the
absence of these ‘those, *connected with silver*’—*i.e*., vessels of
wood, or of copper, or of gold, should have one part touched with
silver. The vessels referred to here are those in which large quantities
of butter, honey and vegetables and other things are kept for being
offered; and in connection with these, it is enjoined that they should
be *of silver*. As for the actual offering of the *ball* and other
things, this has to be done with the hands; the libations of water—such
as those poured over the balls, etc.—these also should be offered, with
the hands; in view of the clear injunction that these offerings should
be made ‘with hand, the thread passing over the right shoulder.’ The
daily libations of water also are to be offered with the hands—the
thread passing over the left or the right shoulder.

“But all this has been laid down in connection with *śrāddhas*, and, as
such, cannot be connected with another act.”

Even such subsidiary details are admissible in an act as are not
mentioned in the same context with itself.

“But such details are already mentioned in connection with the act
itself.”

That may be so; and in that case, the present right may be only a
reiteration of the same.

‘*Even water*’—the term ‘*even*’ indicates high praise; the sense being
that—‘to say nothing of the offering of richly cooked food, even water
alone, if offered in a silver-vessel, becomes, by reason of its
connection with silver, ‘*conducive* *to imperishability*’—*i.e*., it
becomes the source of ever-lasting satisfaction (to the Pitṛs).

‘*With faith*;’—being already enjoined in connection with *all givings*,
its mention here is purely reiterative.—(202)


