+++
title = "205 दैवाद्यन्तन् तद्"

+++
That in whose beginning and at whose end a rite in honour of the gods is
performed is said to ‘*begin and end with a rite in honour of the
gods*.’ The beginning of the *Śrāddha* rite should be made with a rite
performed in honour of the gods; it is for this reason that the
invitation of the Brāhmaṇas in honour of the gods should be done first.
‘*End*’ is *completion*. The meaning is that the Brāhmaṇas fed in honour
of the gods.should be dismissed after those fed in honour of the Pitṛs
have been sent away.

Some people hold that in the offering of sandal-paste, *&c*. also,
beginning should be made with what is done in honour of the gods.

But, in regard to these details, it is not possible to make either the
beginning or the end with what is done in honour of the gods; as this
would lead to repe???on (repetition?). Further, that *it should begin
and end with what is done in honour of the gods* has been laid down here
as pertaining to the entire procedure, and not to each of the
intervening details. That the performance of the details shall begin
with what is done in honour of the gods would follow from the natural
course of the action; it having been fixed that the inviting is to begin
with those invited in honour of the gods, it would be only natural that
the other details shall also start with the same with which that first
step had started; since one detail controls the starting of another
detail, as laid down in the assertion that—‘the starting of the details
is determined by the time fixed for them in connection with the Primary
Act.’

Such a *Śrāddha* -rite one shall ‘endeavour’ to perform.

The rest of the verse is a purely laudatory description.

‘*It should never be one beginning and ending with a rite in honour of
the Pitṛs*’—Inasmuch as it has been already enjoined that the act should
begin and end with what is done in honour of the gods, the further
prohibition of beginning and ending with what is done in honour. of the
Pitṛs has to be taken, in the manner of ordinary assertions, as a purely
descriptive reiteration. In ordinary parlance, having laid down one
thing, one often negatives its contrary, even though there be no
possibility of this latter being adopted. As a matter of fact, an action
controls the substance, not what is not a substance.

‘*Quickly perishes, along with his progeny*;’—this deprecatoy
description is meant to indicate that the man fails to obtain the reward
in the form of offsprings.

From this it follows that all the acts, of serving the food and the
like, should begin with what is done in honour of the gods. As for what
is done during the process—the serving of more rice, &c., at intervals,
the supplying of water to those that may happen to want water for
drinking, and so forth,—all this should be done first to one who may
happen to express his desire first. If one were to offer these things to
one who does not want them, simply because of his being invited in
honour of the gods, then one would be trans- greasing the principal
injunction that—‘one should make the Brāhmaṇas happy.’

Some one may happen to be fond of sweets, another may be one who finds
adds more wholesome; so that, having provided “various edibles and
fragrant drinks” (Manu, 3. 227), if, by other considerations, one were
to give to one what suits his taste and constitution, the invitee would
contract disease.

From all this it follows that in the feeding it is only the beginning
and end that should be done with those invited in honour of the
gods.—(205)


