+++
title = "209 उपवेश्य तु"

+++
*Soma* (the Soma plant) is what is called ‘*anagnidagdha*’ (‘not burnt
by fire’); because it is not cooked on fire; and the gods to whom
sacrifices are offered with *Soma*, also come to be called
‘*Anagnidagdha*;’ which connotes the quality of *prosperity*.

Similarly, ‘*agnidagdha*’ (‘burnt by fire’) stands for such substances
as cooked rice, cake, and the like, which are all prepared on fire; and
the gods to whom sacrifices are offered with these are called
‘*Agnidagdha*.’

As before, we construe the verse to mean as follows:—‘Those that are
called *Agnidagdha* should be mentioned as *agnidagdha*, and those that
are called *Anagnidagdha* should be mentioned as *Somapā*.’

Similarly with ‘*Kāvyas*’ and ‘*Barhiṣuds* the ‘*Kāvyas*’ have been
described (in 198) as ‘Somapā;’ and ‘*Barhiṣads*’ as ‘the sons of Atri.’

The particle ‘*eva*’ is not to be construed where it occurs; as, in that
case, the meaning would be that all those mentioned are the Pitṛs of
*Brāhmaṇas only*, not of *Kṣatriyas* and others; and this would be
contrary to what has gone before. Nor have the beings in question been
mentioned as the Pitṛs of various castes, which alone could justify a
few of them being selected and marked as belonging specifically to
*Brāhmaṇas only*. Hence the ‘*eva*’ should be construed along with the
‘*Agniṣvāttas*,’ the ‘*Saumyas*,’ and the rest.

The mention of the ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ being purely reiterative, stands for the
Kṣatriya, &c. also.

The Pitṛs bearing the names here mentioned are found mentioned in the
Veda also:—‘The Pitṛs, named Agniṣvātta, Agnidagdha, Anagnidagdha.’ And
it is out of those mentioned in this *mantra* that our author has
selected some and described them here.

Or, the verse may be construed in the following manner:—‘The Pitṛs that
are spoken of by these names, all these one should mention as the
Brāhmaṇa’s Pitṛs:’ the mere difference in the names should not lead one
to think of the named beings being different.’ In this case, the term
‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ would stand for ‘persons entitled to the performance of
Śrāddha;’ the Brāhmaṇa being so, above all others; and it is always the
predominant factor that serves as the indicative; as we find in the case
of such expressions as ‘the king is passing by.’

\[ *This latter interpretation, being much the simpler of the two, has
been adopted in the Text*.\]—(199)


