+++
title = "212 अग्न्य्-अभावे तु"

+++
The present text lays down an injunction in connection with those cases
where there is no fire, *i.e*., neither one set up according to
‘*smārta*’ rites, nor that kindled at marriage, nor that set up after
succession. As for the ordinary fire, since sacrificing to the Pitṛs in
such fire has been prohibited, there need be no consideration of the
presence or absence of such fire. It is going to be said later on (verse
282) that—‘oblations in connection with the offering to the Pitṛs should
not be offered in the ordinary fire.’

*Question*—“How can there be any possibility of the said Fire being
absent?”

*Answer*—It has been laid down that when a man is away from home and
without his Fire, if he happen to come by a desirable place, the proper
materials and the right type of Brāhmaṇas, he shall regard this as a
suitable opportunity for offering *Śrāddha*; and it is not that the
moonless day is the only one on which *Śrāddha* is to be performed.
Hence the present rule is meant for the man who, when out on a journey,
comes by a ‘sanctifier of company,’ or finds such suitable materials as
the ‘*Kālaśāka*,’ and the like.

“How can one away from home be entitled to the performance of
*Śrāddhas*? If the wife is also with him, away from home, then the Fire
also should be with them; since it is not considered desirable for the
Fire to be separated from both the sacrificer and his wife. It has been
declared that—‘for people away from home, the Fire shall not be
separated.’ If the Householder should happen to go out alone, then there
may be ‘absence of Fire;’ but the man is entitled to make offerings only
when associated with his wife; so that, when the wife is not near him,
her acquiescence being not available, how could there be any possibility
of the man making use of materials belonging to both? In the case of a
material belonging to both, there can be no giving away, in the absence
of the desire of either party. Against this it might be argued that—‘by
the line of reasoning just put forward, it would be impossible to
perform *Śrāddhas* in sacred places (during pilgrimages); and such
non-performance would be contrary to such declarations as—‘at Puṣkara
the Śrāddha is inexhaustible, austerity is highly meritorious; the same
is to be held regarding the Ocean and Prabhāsa.’ There is no force in
this; as such performance would be quite possible for the man who has
set up the Fire, when he goes out on pilgrimage along with his wife. In
the case in question, however, since the man would be journeying with
his wife, the Fire could not be absent. If, however, the man he
journeying alone, then, since he would be ignorant of his wife’s wishes
in the matter, he could not be entitled to the performance.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—When a man is proceeding on a
journey, he seeks his wife’s permission in the following words—‘I shall
be spending our belongings over religious performances;’ and having
obtained this permission, he could be entitled to the performance of
*Śrāddhas*.

Or, the rule laid down in the present text might pertain to boys before
their initiation, at which time the Fire has not been set up; and the
uninitiated boy also is entitled to the performance of *Śrāddha*, as has
been shown under the text where it has been declared that the boy is not
entitled to any rite, *except the offering of Śrāddhas*. Further, for
the Accomplished Student also, if his father happens to die before his
marriage, there would be ‘absence of fire.’

“In the Kāṭhaka, it is found stated that, on the death of the master of
the house, fire should be set up (by his successor),”

This should be taken as applying to one who has married, and not to one
who has merely just completed his studies. Two points of time have been
laid down for the setting up of the ‘*Smārta*’ Fire—on marriage and on
succession. So that, if one has not set up the Fire on marriage,—either
because he does not set up a separate household apart from his father,
or because he continues to live with his elder brother, according to the
law that ‘for brothers that have not separated there is a common
religious rite,’—for such a person, there is the other point of time, on
*succession*, according to the injunction—‘or, from the time of
succession;’ and the ‘time of succession’ is just the time when the
Father dies. And it is to such cases that the following declarations
apply,—‘having become pure, one should make offerings to the Pitṛs,’
‘one should bring fire from the fryer’s pan and then keep vigil,’ and so
forth. The setting up of the Fire mentioned in these texts (referring to
the Fire kindled for the day only) could not be regarded as an essential
factor in *Śrāddha*; for, if it were so, then, before the kindling of
this Fire, since the Fire would not be there, no *Śrāddha* could be
performed. Nor, again, is it possible that such a fire (set up for a
temporary purpose) should not be abandoned. It has been declared that
‘this is the Aupasada Fire, in which the culinary offerings have to be
made;’ and to the culinary offerings also a man without a wife is not
entitled; because of such injunctions as ‘the butter is examined by the
wife,’ ‘the wife should keep the observances,’ and so forth. It will not
be right to argue that—“this keeping of observances and the examining of
the butter are meant to apply to cases where the wife is
present;”—because both these acts have been enjoined as entirely
obligatory. Hence the meaning comes to be that libations are to be
poured into the ‘Aupasada’ fire.

“The father’s death is not the precise time of *succession*; since it
has been declared that the sons shall divide the property, after having
performed the *Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa Śrāddha* (which is done one year after
death).”

The time herein mentioned is that for *division*, nut *succession*. In
fact, for division also there is no such absolute rule that it must be
done after the *Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa*; as it has been declared that ‘separation
among brothers is in view of religious rites;’ and the act of separation
becomes ‘religious,’ when the members separating severally perform
*Śrāddhas* and entertain guests, and so forth. Nor will it be right to
argue that such assertions as ‘the sons shall offer the nine *Śrāddhas*
conjointly’—refers to persons who have finished their studies. Because
it may be that a man, having acquired only a little learning, marries a
wife with a view to guard himself against transgressing the rule of
having intercourse with one’s own wife, to which he would be prone by
excess of sexual desire; but having married, be might devote greater
attention to the studies he had begun, and thus complete his studies
within a year, And it is with reference to such cases that we have the
rule regarding the sons dividing their property after having performed
the *Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa*.

Then again, when a man has lost a wife and is going to marry another,
till he has married again, there would be ‘absence of fire.’ Specially
because, in view of the general law that ‘one should make sacrificial
offerings in the company of his wife,’ which shows that there can be no
setting up of fire for one who has not married.

Such being the case, when Fire is absent, one should place the oblations
in the hands of the Brāhmaṇa—“Of which Brāhmaṇa?”—Of one of those that
have been invited; either of one who has been invited in honour of the
gods, or of some other invited Brāhmaṇa.

As a laudatory description, we have the words—‘*what the Fire is*, &c.’

This is the opinion of those ‘seers of mantras’ who know their
meanings.—(212).


