+++
title = "220 ध्रियमाणे तु"

+++
It has been said that ‘one shall offer balls to the Pitṛs.’ Now the
question arises—Who are these ‘*Pitṛs?*’ The term ‘*pitṛ*’ has several
meanings, and denotes ‘progenitor’; (A) it is used in the sense of the
relative term, ‘father’; (B) it is also used in the sense of one’s
father and other relations that have died before. It is in this latter
sense that we have the term used in the *plural* in all such
*Nigada-mantras* as ‘*namo vaḥ pitaraḥ*, &c.’. It is for the same
reason, again, that at the Śrāddha offered to females, these mantras do
not undergo transmutation into the form ‘*namo vo mātaraḥ*, &c.;’ on the
same grounds, again, at the the *Śrāddha* offered to a single person, it
is only the *number* that is changed, not the *basic noun* (pitṛ). Says
the author of the *Sutra* also—‘Mantras should be transformed only in
regard to the singular number;’ the transformed words being—‘*namaste
pitaḥ*.’ Similarly, he who performs the unitary Śrāddha of his brother
or grandfather, uses the *mantra* in the form ‘*namaste bhrātaḥ*,’
‘*namaste pitāmaha*,’ ‘*namaste pitṛvya*,’ and so forth. The offering of
*Śrāddha* to one’s childless uncle has been enjoined as necessary, in
such passages as—‘what one receives from another that he shall give unto
him.’ (C) Further, the term ‘*pitṛ*’ also denotes a particular Deity;
and in this sense, it would stand for an unchanging eternal being. In
fact, the author of the *Nirukta*, in the Daivata Section of the work,
gives the name ‘*Pitṛ*,’ to the divine Beings occupying the Middle
Regions, describing them as ‘*Pitṛs*, the Maruts bearing the rosary of
beads.’

The term ‘*pitṛ*,’ thus having several meanings, the Text proceeds to
specify what is meant by it in the present context.

‘*While his father holds*,’—is alive—‘*one should make the offering to
the previous ancestors*,’—‘*i.e*., to the three, the grandfather, the
great-grandfather and the father of the latter; that these three are
meant is indicated by the plural number. Says the *Gṛhyasūtra*—‘The son
should offer to those to whom the father offers, if both father and son
are persons who have set up the fire.’

“But they say that the ball does not reach the fourth ancestor.”

True; but, in the case in question, no *fourth* ball is offered.

The text provides another alternative course to be adopted—‘*As a
Brāhmaṇa*, etc.’ That is, Brāhmaṇas, Religious Students and Ascetics are
invited and honoured and worship-pod and fed; and exactly in the same
manner should the father be honoured and fed by one whose father is
still alive ‘*at the Śrāddha*,’—*i.e*., the food cooked for the
*Śrāddha* offerings.

In this case, the fact of the man being his father, is the sole ground
for his being fed; hence it is not necessary to look into his caste and
qualifications. To this end they declare thus:—‘The *Śrāddha* is for the
purpose of giving pleasure to one’s ancestors’;—hence the bringing about
of the pleasure of the dead father being necessary, what harm would
there be in feeding the living father, in view of which he could not be
fed?

‘*Own*’—Is merely reiterative; what is denoted by this being already
connoted by the relative term, ‘father,’ itself.

What is laid down here is the actual *feeding* of the Father; but the
Balls are placed for the Pitṛs on *Kuśa* blades; as otherwise, there
would be an incompatibility with the formula ‘this ball is for you.’ If
the Kusba-blades be regarded as substitutes for the Dish, then, in the
event of the living Father’s possession being brought about (by the act
of offering), it would not be right to make him eat ‘a very small
portion;’ because, for the living person, the eating is to be in
accordance with the eater’s desire. Further, in this case, there would
be no need of pouring water and other things over the ball offered; as
such a process would lead to the undesirable contingency of a ‘hybrid
performance;’ any effect produced by the pouring of water, in this case,
would serve no useful purpose, cither for the man himself or for his
father; so that it could only serve an imperceptible transcendental
purpose; on the other hand, if water were not poured over the ball, it
might be fit for being eaten either by the father, or by the offerer
himself, or by some one else. It is in this way that the act may turn
out to be of a ‘hybrid’ character.

For these reasons, it follows that, in this alternative, the *ball* is
to be offered to only two persons, the grandfather and the
great-grandfather.

The authors of the Gṛhyasūtras, however, declare that—‘for one whose
father is alive there is neiher *Piṇḍapitṛyajña*, nor *Śrāddha*;—there
is either non-performance of these rites, or their performance only up
to the stage of pouring libations into fire.’—(220)


