+++
title = "223 तेषान् दत्त्वा"

+++
This is a purely laudatory declaration; and it makes the Brāhmaṇas
attain the dignity of gods. \[The sense being\]—Agni (Fire) is a god,
and when a libation is poured into the Fire, the gods eat it, through
the Fire as their mouth; the *Brāhmaṇas* also have the same character;
and whatever is placed in their hands, that also the gods eat.

“What is that character of the gods, by virtue of which the Brāhmaṇas
are spoken of as having the same character?”

It is in answer to this that the text adds—‘*free* *from anger* &c.’ As
regards the question why they are so described, the explanation is that
what is meant is that the libations of butter should be offered into the
hands of such Brāhmaṇas as are endowed with the character here
described.

Others have explained that in a foregoing verse (192),

‘*freedom from anger*’ and the rest have been laid down as the qualities
to be sought for those invited in honour of the Pitṛs and who were meant
to be eulogised,—while the present text lays down these as to be sought
for in those, invited in honour of the gods. This is the difference
between the two texts. It is in this sense that they have been described
as ‘*the gods of śrāddha*.’

‘*Ancients*’—*i.e*., the sages.

Or, we may read the term ‘*purātana*’ with the accusative ending;
‘ancient’ (in this case) qualifying ‘*gods*;’—the ‘ancient gods’
standing for those deities born in this cycle who are called
‘*sādhyas*.’

‘*Intent upon sustaining the universe*,’—*i.e*., it is with a view to
gratifying people that they eat at *śrāddhas*; hence one should not
think that ‘these men are eating through greediness, and for the purpose
of obtaining the perceptible pleasure (of eating tasty food), and hence
why should any honour be rendered to them?’ Because these men sustain
the universe,—*i.e*., the Earth, the Sky and the Heaven; therefore, they
should not be treated with disrespect.—(213)


