+++
title = "226 गुणांश् च"

+++
‘*Nyupya*’—‘having offered,’—‘*on kuśa-blades*’—he should wipe that hand
*on those* same kuśa-blades,—those same on which the balls have been
offered.

In accordance with the opinion of other *Smṛtis*, the wiping is to be
done on the root-end of the kuśa-blades.

Others have held that this rule does not mean simply that the food and
water attaching to the hand should be so wiped; in fact, even though
nothing may be attached to the hand, yet even the hand itself should be
wiped on the blades. The reason for this is that the act here prescribed
is not in the nature of the ‘disposal of remnants,’ in which case alone
it could he held to be done only when the stated conditions would be
present. Specially as what is prescribed is, not that ‘one should wipe
*what is attaching to the hand*,’ but that ‘he should wipe the *hand*.’

Against this it might be argued that—“we find it stated that the act is
‘for the sake of the Partakers of Smearings,’ which shows that it cannot
be done when there is no ‘smearing’ at all. Why, then, should it be said
that, even when there is nothing sticking to the hand, the act should be
done?”

The answer to this is as follows:—It is possible that solid food may not
stick to the hand; but when the ball of food is being rolled up, the
juices of the food are sure to stick to the hand, by reason of the
contact with heat; and it is this that is called the ‘*smearing*.’

The genitive ending in ‘*lepabhāginām*’ connotes the connection of the
act of *wiping* with the particular class of Pitṛs. Any such beings as
‘Partakers of Smearings’ are not visible to the eye; hence it is not
possible to bring about their ‘possession’ in connection with the
‘smearing.’ Hence, all that is meant is that ‘one should think in his
mind that the smearing is meant to be the share of the ‘Partakers of
Smearings;’ or, he may even say this in so many words.

Others have held that ancestors above the great grandfather are spoken
of as ‘Partakers of Smearings.’ According to this view, if the names of
those ancestors are not pronounced, they may be referred to by means of
such expressions as ‘this to the father of my great-grandfather,’ ‘this
to the grandfather of my great-grandfather,’ and so forth.

The singular number in ‘*hand*’ shows that the ball is to be offered
with a single hand in the ‘*apasavya*’ form.

‘*Self-controlled*’—this is a mere reiteration: such control having been
already prescribed above.

‘*According to rule*’—refers to the rules of procedure laid down in
other scriptures; *e.g*., Śaṅkha says—‘One should offer the ball along
with sandal-paint, garlands, incense, doth and dressings.’ The ‘rule’
that has been prescribed in the text by Manu himself has been stated in
his own words; hence the phrase, ‘according to rule,’ would be
meaningless (if it referred to that rule itself). It is for this reason
that this phrase should be taken as summing up the details prescribed in
other scriptures.—(216).


