+++
title = "236 अत्युष्णं सर्वम्"

+++
‘*Atyuṣṇa*,’ ‘very hot,’ stands for ‘hot;’ the term being expounded as
‘*atigatam uṣṇam*,’ ‘with heat developed;’ just as ‘*praparṇa*’ stands
for ‘*prapatitaparṇa*,’ ‘that of which the leaves have fallen.’

‘*All*’—*i.e*., the food as well as the seasonings.

This injunction regarding ‘being hot’ applies to only those things which
ought to be eaten hot, and not to rice cooked in curd and such things,
which, when eaten hot, are disagreeable and harmful; and this would be
contrary to what has been said before regarding ‘bringing delight to the
Brāhmaṇas.’

In view of the injunction of eating hot food, the entire quantity should
not be served at once; as, in that case, for persons who eat much, it
would become cold. Hence, as the food is eaten little by little, more
should be given. It will not be right to argue that “the food out of
which a part has been served becomes a ‘remnant,’ and it would not be
right to serve it as such;” because the rule regarding feeding is that
the action of the eater extends till his complete satisfaction. Further,
the Rice and other things do not come in, in the act of feeding, as
‘gifts to be received;’ that is why there is no reciting of mantras
connected with the receiving of gifts, over the Rice and other articles
of food.

‘*With controlled speech*’—*i.e*., having their speech under full
control; the reversed order of the two terms of the compound is an
archaism. Or, the compound ‘*vāgyatāḥ*’ may be expounded as ‘*vacā
yatāḥ*,’ ‘controlled of speech;’ the compound in this case being in
accordance with Pāṇini’s aphorism, ‘*Sādhanam kṛtā*’; and, in this
sense, the term ‘*yataḥ*’ would have the sense of the active
past-participle. ‘Control’ means *stopping of operation*; and the
‘operation’ of ‘speech’ is *uttering of words*; and it is this latter
that is prohibited; the meaning being that no words, distinct or
indistinct, shall be uttered.

Nor are the qualities of the food to be described. It has been declared
that ‘excellent and well-behaved people, while taking food, shall not
speak to the giver.’

“This injunction is already implied by that relating to the control of
speech.”

True; what is meant by the second injunction is that it should not be
done by gestures even; the root ‘*brū*’ denotes *describing*; so that
the word ‘*brūyuḥ*’ does not necessarily mean *articulate
utterance*.—(236)


