+++
title = "247 आ-सपिण्डक्रियाकर्म द्विजातेः"

+++
‘*For the twice-born person, just dead*’— one should perform the rite up
to ‘Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa;’ *i.e*., the offering of balls conjointly with the
two preceding ancestors, which constitutes the Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa, the
‘Amalgamating Rite,’ shall not be made once—what, then, shall be
offered?—‘*He should offer one ball*;’ the particle ‘*ca*’ having the
sense of ‘*only*;’ the sense is that ‘one ball shall be offered, only to
the person just dead.’ The Brāhmaṇa also shall be fed in honour of that
person only.

In another *Smṛti*, there is declared another specific procedure—‘It
shall be without invitation and doing in fire’ (*Yājñavalkya*, *ācāra*
251); where ‘doing in fire’ stands for the seeking of permission with
the words, ‘I shall do this in fire;’ and the pouring of libations into
fire is not prohibited. In the *Gṛhyasūtra*, libations into fire have
been laid down in connection with the *Śrāddha* offered to the recent
dead.

At what time and how long is the rite to be performed—information on
these points should be sought for from another *Smṛti*; where it is said
that—(A) ‘The first *Śrāddha* is on the eleventh day,’—(B) ‘on the date
of death, for one year, the Śrāddha should be done every month, and
every year it shall be performed, like the monthly performance,’—and in
the *Kathaka* it is said, ‘This should be done every year.’

\(A\) The term ‘eleventh’ is only indicative of the day on which the
period of impurity ceases; since it has been declared that ‘having
become pure, one should make offerings to the Pitṛs.’

\(B\) The author of *Gṛhyasūtras* declares that the ‘Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa’
shall be performed at the end of the year.

The *Śrāddha* mentioned in the text is called ‘*Ekoddiṣṭa*’ (‘offered to
one person’); and the ‘offering’ (of the ball) is part of it.

It has been held that, on account of the declaration of the *Śruti*‘ one
should make offerings to the Pitṛs’ (quoted above),—the offering should
be made to the Father, Grand-father and Great-grandfather. But it cannot
be right to make this offering (to all three) until the
‘*Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa*’ has been performed. Because the *Smṛti* (regarding the
*Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa*) cannot be entirely set aside by the said Vedic
declaration.—(247)


