+++
title = "257 मुन्य्-अन्नानि पयः"

+++
‘*Hermit*’—*i.e*., the Vānaprastha; his ‘*food*’ consists of the
*Nīvāra* and other wild-growing grains; this is mentioned only by way of
illustration; it indicates the *Vrīhi* and other similar grains; and it
is in view of this that in the preceding verse we have the phrase ‘of
all kinds,’ and also in the verse 266, the expression, ‘sacrificial food
which serves for a long time,’ which introduces the enumeration of
artificially grown grains also, such as ‘*tila, vrīhi*, *yava, māṣa*,’
and so forth.

‘*Milk*’—which includes its preparations, such as curds and the like;
such being the sense of *Smṛtis* and also sanctioned by usage.

‘*Unforbidden*’—sanctioned, not prohibited. Meat obtained from
slaughter-houses is regarded as ‘forbidden.’

‘*Akṣāralavaṇa*’—A doubt arises here as to whether this is a negative
compound containing a copulative one, or a purely negative compound.
Does it mean merely ‘absence of salts and alkalines’ (as it would, if it
were a negative compound with a copulative one), or is ‘*kṣāra-kavaṇa*’
(alkaline salt) the name of a particular kind of salt, and the text
permits the use of salts other than that kind *?* It appears better to
take it as standing for a particular kind of salt. If it meant the mere
negation of a copulative compound, there would be two compounds, and the
negative particle would have to be construed with each of the two
members of the copulative compound; and all this would involve a great
deal of complication.

‘*Sacrificial food, by nature*;’—that is, all this is to be regarded as
‘sacrificial food,’ without any qualifications; this is what is to be
understood to be the meaning in all such general injunctions as ‘he
lives upon *sacrificial food*,’ breakfasts on *sacrificial food*,’ and
so forth—(257).


