+++
title = "258 विसृज्य ब्राह्मणांस्"

+++
After the *Sapṇḍīkaraṇa* or the Amalgamating Rite has been performed,
offering should be made to all the three ancestors, by ‘*that same
method*;’ *i.e*., in accordance with the procedure of the
“*Pārvaṇa-śrāddha*,” The term ‘*āvṛt*’ means *procedure*, *method*;
which is thus prescribed—‘The *Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa Śrāddha* should be
performed, as preceded by the rite in honour of the gods;—the Pitṛs
should be fed,—and among them the person just dead.’ By the term ‘Pitṛs’
here are meant the three ancestors beginning with the Grandfather, who
have already entered the category of the ‘Pitṛs,’ by having been
‘united;’ these should be fed;—and ‘among them’—*i.e*., among those same
Brāhmaṇas that are fed for the united Pitṛs, the ‘person just dead’
should be invited; as it is thus that he becomes united with the
ancestors; and this rite is meant to bring about this union Though Viṣṇu
reads—‘One should feed Brāhmaṇas in honour of the dead person, also in
that of the father, grandfather, and greatgrandfather of the dead
person,’—yet here also it is not stated that they shall be fed
separately. So that, just as a sacrificial material intended for several
deities is offered to them all in a single oblation, similarly, the
Brāhmaṇa also may be fed in honour of several ancestors; and there would
be no incongruity in this. In fact, it is only thus that the use of the
term ‘*saha*’ (in our text) becomes justified; and thus also it is that
one avoids the feeding of an even number of Brāhmaṇas at the rite in
honour of the Pitṛs \[as there would be, if the Brāhmaṇa fed in honour
of the dead person were distinct from the three fed in honour of the
three higher *united* ancestors.\] Further, according to those persons
who accept the second alternative mentioned in verse 125, and feed one
Brāhmaṇa each at the rite, in honour of the gods and that in honour of
the Pitṛs, only one man is fed in honour of the three ancestors;
similarly, here also (the same Brāhmaṇa shall be fed for four).

“The same line of argument would apply also to the rule that ‘three
persons should be fed at the rite, in honour of the Pitṛs;’ and there
also each of these three men might he fed in honour of all the. Pitṛs;
as there also there is no mention of their being distinct.”

How do you say that there is no such mention? We read in the
*Gṛhyasūtra*—‘One ball alone shall not be offered to all,—this has been
made clear by the term *balls* itself.’ Then again, it is said that ‘the
cup dedicated to the deceased shall be poured into the cups dedicated to
the Pitṛs;’ and if the cup of the deceased person were not distinct,
from which cup could the water-offering be poured? If it be said that it
would be poured out of the cup dedicated to all in common,—this would be
highly improper; for that cup will have been dedicated to the three
ancestors beginning with the grandfather, and not to the father (just
dead); and it would not be proper to offer the water to the latter out
of that which has been dedicated to others. It might be argued that the
*mixing up* (laid down in the text just quoted) might be done after the
water-offering has been made. But in that case, the said mixing would be
done for the purposes of an entirely different offering; and this would
be contrary to the injunction regarding the ‘pouring out,’ On the other
hand, there is no incongruity in the method described by us above.

The next question that arises is—Who is it that is called ‘*Preta*,’
‘departed,’ ‘deceased’ (mentioned by Viṣṇu above as one in whose honour
Brāhmaṇas should be fed)? \[The word meaning ‘dead’ should apply to all
ancestors.\]. As a matter of fact, however, no ball is offered to the
great-grandfather after the Amalgamating Bite has been performed, since
he has become united with the previous ancestors. Says the *Smṛti*,—

‘One who offers a separate hall to the *united* deceased, becomes by
that act, the murderer of injunctions, as also of his father.’ And yet
the ball is offered to the ‘deceased’ separately; and one and the same
ball is not offered in common to all. In fact, the mantras that are
recited at the rite also express the same idea —‘*ye samānāḥ*, *&c*.’

Our answer to the above is as follows¹The term ‘*preta*,’ ‘departed,’
does not denote the act connoted by the root ‘*iṇ*,’ ‘to go;’ in fact,
it is used, not in its etymological, but conventional, sense of ‘one
*recently* dead;’ certainly, one who has gone out on a long journey is
not called a ‘*preta*’ (as he should he, if the term were used in its
etymological sense). Further, the action of ‘going’ is present in the
person who died long ago, as well as in one only just dead. It is for
this reason that we have such expressions in the *Śruti* as—(*a*)
‘*Prayannevāsmallokād-yesamānāḥ*, etc.,’ and (*b*)
‘*pretāyāmandinatrayam*’—where the term ‘*preta*’ is applied to one
recently dead. As for the text quoted above—‘he who would offer a
separate ball to the deceased, etc.,’—the meaning of it is as follows:
After the ‘Amalgamating Rite,’ the ‘*Ekoddiṣṭa*’ the ‘Unitary Rite,’
should not be performed,—whenever *śrāddha* is performed, it should he
offered to all the three ancestors,—and on the date of death also, it
should be offered to the three ancestors, and not to the Father only. It
is thus that the method of the ‘*Pārvaṇa-śrāddha*’ has been mentioned in
the present text,—by the words, ‘by this same method’—as to be adopted,
in the *Śrāddha* in question also.

“The pronoun ‘this’ appears to stand for what forms the subject-matter
of the present context; as pronouns, by their very nature, denote what
is nearest to them; and in the present instance, what is nearest is the
injunction regarding the ‘Unitary Rite.’”

Not so. If, even after the performance of the ‘Amalgamating Rite,’ the
offering were made to one person only, then there would be no point in
mentioning the two cases separately (as is done in 247 and 248).
Further, the particle ‘*tu*,’ ‘but,’ clearly indicates deviation from
the method of what forms the subject-matter of the context; the sense
being—‘the rule that has been laid down pertains to the case where the
Amalgamating Rite has not been performed; but this should not be applied
to the case where the said Rite has been performed.’ From all this it
follows that, even though the mention of the method of the ‘*Pārvaṇa*’
is more remote, yet it is that which is meant to be adopted, in the
present connection. Further, if after the performance of the
‘Amalgamating Rite,’ whenever it would be necessary to perforin the
‘Unitary Rite,’ the offering to all three ancestors would be made on the
Amāvasyā day,—then what would be the difference? For, in this case also,
would not there be present the condition mentioned in the present
text—‘after the Amalgamating Rite has been performed, etc., etc.’ Nor in
the Institutes of Manu do we find any other time prescribed, such as
‘every year on the date of death etc.,’ to which the present text could
be held to apply. So that (by the reasoning of the opponent), in all
cases, it would be the ‘Unitary Rite’ that would have to be performed.
And this would be contrary to the declaration of the Mahābhārata, where,
in reference to the places of pilgrimage, it is said—

‘He satisfied his forefathers by means of *śrāddha*.’

As regards the text of the other *Smṛti*—‘livery year, the śrāddha shall
be performed like the monthly performance,’—here also the ‘*monthly
śrāddha*’ refers to the *śrāddha* on the *Amāvasyā*; as this latter is
the archetype of all *śrāddhas*; and it is in connection with this that
all the details have been prescribed. And it will not be right to take
the term, ‘monthly performance,’ as standing for the *Śrāddha* performed
every month during the year; because no specific details have been
prescribed in connection with this latter, whereby it could be
differentiated. As for the ‘Unitary Rite,’ the first of its kind is
performed on the eleventh day (after death, (or the *Brāhmaṇa*), and on
the thirteenth day (for the *Kṣatriya*), and so forth. Hence it cannot
be right to refer to the ‘Unitary Rite’ by the term ‘monthly
performance;’ the monthly performance is so called because of its
connection with the ‘month’ as the time; but there is no connection
between the Unitary Rite and any such time as the ‘month;’ it having
been shown that it is connected with other points of time also. For
instance, it having been declared that—‘becoming pure, one should make
offerings to the Pitṛs,’ it follows that such offerings could be made
before the end of the month, as well as after it; so that there is no
reason for speaking of it by the name ‘monthly performance.’ As for the
‘*Amāvasyā Śrāddha*,’ on the other hand, its originative injunction
containing the term ‘*Pūrṇamāsa*’ (the Full Moon Day, which literally
means *Full-Month*),—the time being fixed by such texts as ‘the offering
should be made *monthly*’—and no other time being mentioned in this
connection,—and all the details of the *Amāvasyā Śrāddha* being found
present in the *Śrāddha* in question also,—it is only right that this
latter should be declared as having the details of the ‘*Amāvasyā*’
applicable to it.

The Śrāddha-offering with uncooked substances also has its archetype in
the ‘*Pārvaṇa-Śrāddha*;’ and having this for its archetype, it would
follow that the offering is to be made to three ancestors; and hence (in
view of the possibility of this being accepted), the text enjoins the
propriety of the ‘Unitary Offering’ only.

As for Yājñavalkya’s declaration (*Ācāra*, 256)—‘For one year, every
month, on the date of death, the Śrāddha should be performed; similarly,
at the end of each year; the first Śrāddha being performed on the
eleventh day (after death);’—here also it is the same method that is
prescribed. There also it is the ‘*Amāvasyā Śrāddha*,’ that has been
recognised as the archetype. Even if the ‘Unitary

Rite’ were connected with the ‘month’ as the time, it would not be right
to make it borrow its details from the Rite here mentioned; as a beggar
does not beg from another beggar; so that, since this also would be as
much of an ‘Ectypal Rite’ as the ‘Unitary Rite’ itself (there could be
no borrowing between them).

Further, there is only one *Śrāddha*; and the term ‘monthly’ being a
generic one, there is nothing to indicate that it stands for the
‘Unitary Rite’ only.

In Yājñavalkya also we find the same thing. If Yājñavalkya’s text were
taken as referring to what has gone immediately before it, then the
method of the ‘Amalgamating Rite’ should be applicable to it; as the
*Śrāddha* in question is found mentioned after this latter. Having
said—‘this is the Amalgamating Rite,’ and ‘before the Amalgamating
Rite,’—it is said immediately after this ‘on the date of death, &c.’

From all this it follows that not taking any account of mere proximity,
the details that are indicated as belonging to it are those of the
‘*Amāvasyā Śrāddha*.’

The Mantras also support our view. It says—‘Become united with the
previous ancestors, &c., &c.;’ and it is the person recently dead who is
thus addressed; the plural number in ‘*Saṃsṛjyadhvam*; being purely
honorific: as says the author of the *Nirukta*—‘In the expression *etā
utyā uṣasaḥ* &c., the single *Uṣas*, Dawn, is spoken of in the plural,
for the purpose of showing respect to it.”

“The term ‘*Saṃsṛjyadhvam*,’ ‘become united,’ should refer to those
balls into which the ball offered to the deceased is thrown in; and this
latter ball also should be referred to by words in the plural,
‘*pūrvebhiḥ pitṛbhiḥ* etc.’ For in this case it is only this latter
plural number that will have to be regarded as figurative. Otherwise, if
the plural verb ‘*Saṃsṛjyadhvam*’ also were taken as referring to the
ball that is thrown in, the plural number in both would have to be
regarded as figurative and unreal.”

There is no force in this also. Because as a matter of fact, what
becomes united with each one of the balls is only a portion of the ball
that is thrown in; as is clear from the direction—‘having offered the
fourth ball, one should divide it into three parts and put it into the
balls so that the three balls do not all become the *container*, at one
and the same time; and it is only if this were the case that the plural
number in ‘*Saṃsṛjyadhvam*’ could be applicable literally.

“If each of the three is referred to separately, even so, why could not
the plural in ‘*Saṃsṛjyadhvam*’ and the indirect address be taken as
referring to the balls into which the one ball is thrown in? Specially
as the word ‘*pitrvebhiḥ*’ referring to the ball that is thrown in, it
would not be right to refer to it by the pronoun ‘*ebhiḥ*,’ ‘these.”’

Well, the Mantra in question—‘*Saṃsṛjyaḍhvam* etc.’ not being an
injunctive one, we need not trouble ourselves over its interpretation;
it is, as a matter of fact, purely descriptive; and the description
applies to what is enjoined; and in the present connection what has been
enjoined is the *uniting* of the balls; so that this *uniting* is all
that is indicated by the *Mantra*. As for the *number* (singular or
plural), this is not directly enjoined (by any text), and hence also not
obtained by implication; it becomes connected with the passage by mere
probability, and this *probability* is recognised prior to the *Mantra*
(which therefore could have no bearing upon it).

Some people have said that—“the term ‘fourth’ (in the text just quoted)
may mean simply *predecessor*; so that the deceased (father) being the
first, in relation to him the great-grandfather would be the ‘fourth’
predecessor.”

This also is not right. In fact, it is the ball offered to the deceased
which is called the *fourth*,—this being the one which completes the
number *four*, after the balls to his ancestors have been deposited.
Further, the *Śrāddha* in question begins with the *Pitṛs*, and not with
the deceased; since it has been declared that—‘one shall invite the
Pitṛs, not mentioning the deceased.’ So that the order to be adopted
would be that the first ball offered is to the father (of the deceased);
and in regard to this also the following rule has been laid down; *The
dividing into three parts* and the placing upon the balls to the Pitṛs
are to be done of that same ball which is the fourth. All that is meant
there is that ‘one should giveaway the fourth ball after having divided
it into three parts;’ the connection of the ‘ball’ with the act of
‘giving away’ being clearly implied. When the question arises as to what
is that which is to be divided into three parts,—it is *the ball* that
is mentioned in close proximity which becomes connected with it. All
doubts being set at rest by this, there is apparently no ground for
connecting the term ‘fourth’ also with it.

Then again, when there is a doubt as to which ball is it that is to be
divided, the answer is supplied by another Smṛti—‘Having offered four
balls to each individual name, the offerer of the ball should divide the
*first* with the two mantras beginning with *ye samānāḥ*.’ The one
particular ball is called ‘*first*’ only in view of its being the first
to be offered, and not because of its being related to the first
ancestor. Because the great-grandfather would be the ‘predecessor’ of
the grandfather, who, in his turn, would be the ‘predecessor’ of the
Father; so that there being no definiteness, the exact meaning of the
verse would remain uncertain. The order of the *offering*, however, is
fixed by rule; hence in that there is no indefiniteness.

Thus then, the act of *dividing into three parts* having been connected
with the fourth ball, this dividing should be done, on the strength of
another *Smṛti*, in the order of the *offering*. Consequently, it is
said in the *Kāṭhaka* that—‘it is clear that the dividing is of the
previously dead,’;—we ask now—whence does it follow that this is clear?

It has been held that—“the offering is not made to the deceased because
he has become included among the Pitṛs.”

This also is nothing. Because it is in accordance with a direct
injunction that the offering is not made: ‘The ball does not go to the
fourth;’ again ‘the ball proceeds to three only.’ As for the reading
invented by the writer himself—‘he shall not mention the deceased,’ and
the explanation of this as that ‘the deceased having become united with
the Pitṛs, this text prohibits a further offering to him,’—the fact of
the matter is that the reading of the text is not thus; in reality no
prohibitive term is found in the text at all; what is found is the
cumulative particle (‘*ca*’ instead of ‘*na*’). Even if the reading
contained the negative particle, the same explanation would apply to
this case which we have pointed out in connection with the prohibition
of a separate ball for the deceased contained in the verse—‘*yaḥ
sapiṇḍīkṛtam* etc. etc’.

As regards such assertions as—‘after the Amalgamating Rite the son shall
perform for his parents, every year, the Unitary Rite, and for the rest
the *Pārvaṇa* rite’,—and so forth, if there are really such passages (in
authoritative works) then what is the use of the proclaiming of the name
‘*Amāvasyā*?’ In fact, these passages are not found in any of the
well-known Smṛti texts recognised by cultured people.

For these reasons, we conclude that there is nothing to indicate any
differentiation, from which we could deduce the fact that the balls
offered to the ancestors are placed upon that offered to the deceased.
For this same reason the established practice should not be abandoned.
It has also been shown that this same view is in accordance with reason;
Thus it is clear that some people have been led to accept the view that
the balls of the ancestors are to be deposited, by construing the words
of the text in a different manner.

In verse 247 here—where it is said that ‘For the twice-born person just
dead, there should be performed the rite upto Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa, one should
do the feeding at his *Śrāddha* without any in honour of the gods, and
he shall offer one ball;’—The ‘*Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa*’ or ‘Amalgamating Rite’
should be regarded only as partially binding in a case where the Father
has died, while the Grandfather is still alive; *i.e*., it is to be
performed only when no regard is paid to the prohibition contained in
the words ‘one shall not make an offering that involves the ignoring of
a living person.’ When, however, one accepts the view that ‘there should
be precedence etc. etc.’ then, the Grandfather should be left out and
the dead father should be united to the higher ancestors. Similarly, the
rite is only partially binding when the Father is offering the *Śrāddha*
to his dead son. Similarly, too, when one’s wife dies without issue, the
performance is only partially binding upon the step-son whose mother may
be living.

Says the text—‘For those that die childless, others shall perform the
rite, and those ladies again for those.’

The term ‘*sutaiḥ*,’ ‘sons’ in the text stands for *children*; though
the presence of the term ‘*suta*’ might be taken to indicate the
inclusion of the son’s substitutes also, if the particle ‘*sva*,’ ‘own,’
were not taken as precluding those others.—(248)


