+++
title = "275 यद् यद्"

+++
Until the Brāhmaṇas have departed, the food that may be contained in the
dishes out of which they have eaten, or which may have fallen on the
ground, shall not be removed.

‘*After that, he should make the domestic offering*.’ The *Śrāddha* rite
having been finished, he should offer the oblation to the Viśvedevas and
attend to the daily routine of feeding the guests, &c. The term
‘*offering*’ is merely indicative.

Others offer the following explanation:—“The term ‘offering’ here stands
for the offering made to the elementals; and in this way the pouring of
libations into fire before the feeding of *Brāhmaṇas*, does not become
improper. It will not be right to argue that—‘when the rite in honour of
the Pitṛs has been begun, it cannot be right to thrust into it other
rites;’—for, according to the rule by which the *Śrāddha* extends over
two days, though the inviting of the Brāhmaṇas (which is part of the
*Śrāddha*) is done on the preceding day, yet there is nothing wrong in
the morning and evening libations being offered into fire; and the same
may be the case with the *Vaiśvadeva* libation, which also is poured
into the ‘Upasad’ fire. So that what are postponed (till after the
completion of the *Śrāddha*) are only those details that come
*after*—and not those that come *before*—the offering to the
elementals.”

Our reply to the above is as follows:—If the *Vaiśvadeva* oblation is
offered into the fire beforehand, then the *ball-offering* would come
after the *Śrāddha*; and in that case the ‘sacrifice to the gods’ and
the ‘offering to the elementals’ would become separated; and this would
militate against the prescribed order of sequence. Further, the time
being taken up by the *Śrāddha* offered to the Pitṛs, this does not
quite interfere with the time of the *Vaiśvadeva* oblation. From all
this it follows that all the ‘Great Sacrifices’ should be performed
after the *Śrāddha*.


