+++
title = "282 न पैतृयज्ञियो"

+++
The ‘Homa,’ ‘oblation into fire,’ offered in connection with the Rite in
honour of the Pitṛs is called ‘*Paitṛyajñikahoma*;’—this ‘*has not been
prescribed as to be offered into the common*’—*i.e*., the
*Smārta*—‘*fire*.’ That is, the Scriptures do not enjoin it as to be
done in that manner. Hence it follows that the offering of *Śrāddha*
‘three times during the year’ is to be made by one who has not set up
the Fire. Though this offering three times would be ‘offering into the
common Fire,’ yet it would be as good as ‘*not done*,’ in comparison
with what is done throughout the year. For instance, when a man who can
eat a seer has eaten less, people are found to say, ‘he has not eaten.’

Older commentators have explained this as a reiterative supplement to
what has gone in the preceding verse.

The right view to take, however, appears to be that what is said in the
text is that the oblation into Fire, in connection with *Śrāddhas*,
should not be offered into the ‘common Fire,’—*i.e*., such fire as has
not been set up at marriage or other prescribed times. And this
prohibition of the ‘oblation into Fire’ implies that details other than
that may be done in the common fire. If such were not the meaning, then,
in view of the fact that the ‘oblation into fire,’ offered by the person
who has set up the fire, has been prescribed as part of the
*Pārvaṇa-Śrāddha*, the person who has not set up the Fire would not be
entitled to the performance of *Śrāddhas* at all; just as, in view of
the fact that the blind person cannot do the ‘looking into the butter,’
he is not entitled to the performance of the *Darśa Pūrṇamāsa*
sacrifi-ces. If it be, as we have explained it, then it comes to this
that the *Śrāddha* performed by the man who has set up the fire would be
accompanied by oblations into fire, while that performed by one. who has
not set up the fire would be without such oblations. And in this, case,
what is said here falls within what has been said in verse 212 above.

Some people have offered the following explanation:—“What is meant here
is the *Piṇḍapitṛyajña*; and the oblation into fire that is offered at
this is never offered into the Common Fire.”

Others have said that this is not right, for even so the person who has
not set up the Fire might cook the oblation day by day and then offer
it.

Others, again, assert that, in view of the phrase, ‘*apart from the
Moonless Day*,’ it follows that by the person who has set up the Fire
the *Śrāddha* should be offered every month; and that the rule regarding
‘three times in the year’ does not apply to him.

Others, again, have declared that such is not the reading.

What then is the meaning?

The meaning is that, apart from the *Śrāddha* performed on the Moonless
Day, no other *Śrāddha*—such as the ‘*Maghā-Śrāddha*,’ and the like—is
binding upon him; the former alone being necessary for him. For the
person who has not set up the Fire, however, the *Śrāddhas* prescribed
in connection with the winter, etc., also are obligatory.—(282)


