+++
title = "285 विघसाशी भवेन्"

+++
The first quarter of the verse reiterates the ‘eating,’ that has been
laid down before, of the food left after the guests and other persons
have eaten.

All scriptures being meant to be conducive to welfare, scriptural
treatises always conclude with auspicious declarations; and Rites in
honour of the gods are more auspicious than those in honour of the
Pitṛs.

‘*Remnant of sacrifices*.’— This shows that the eating of the remnants
of the *Jyotiṣṭoma* and other sacrifices stands on the same footing a
the ‘eating of Vighasa.’

The second half of the verse contains the explanation of the Vedic
declaration, offered by the author, through kindness. He seeks to remove
any misconception that people might have regarding the two terms in
question, which are what have been used in some Vedic rescensional
texts.

He who eats *Vighasa* is said to ‘live upon Vighasa;’ and he who eats
*Amṛta* is said to ‘eat *Amṛta*.’

‘*What is left by those who must be fed*’—*i.e*., what is left after
persons, who must be fed, have been fed.

Others have explained that what is meant is ‘what has been left after
people have been fed at *Śrāddha*,’—on the ground that it is *Śrāddha*
that forms the subject-matter of the context. To the same end there is
another *Smṛti-text*—‘One should eat after having served the Pitṛs.’

Some people say that the ‘eating’ here mentioned forms part of the
*Śrāddha-* rite. While others have said that this restriction regarding
food is meant to serve a special purpose for man; the treatment of
*Śrāddhas* having ended with verse 284.

‘*Remnant of sacrifices*’ should be understood to mean what is left of
the materials used at sacrifices.—(285)


