+++
title = "006 स्त्रीष्व् अनन्तरजातासु"

+++
**(verses 10.6-41)**

*Arthaśāstra* (pp. 42-45).—‘Sons born to the Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya and
Vaiśya fathers from wives of the next lower caste are of the same caste
as their fathers;—the son born to the Brāhmaṇa from a Vaiśya wife is the
*Ambaṣṭha*; on Śūdra wife, the *Niṣāda* or the *Pāraśava*; to the
Kṣatriya from a Vaiśya wife, the *Ugra*; that born to a Vaiśya from a
Śūdra wife is the *Śūdra*. Sons born to these (Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya and
Vaiśya) from wives of the same caste as themselves, hut married before
*Upanayana*, are *Vrātyas*. These are sons born in the regular mixtures.
From the Śūdra father, on wives of the Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya and Vaiśya
castes are born the *Caṇḍāla*, the *Kṣattṛ* and the *Āyogava*
respectively; from the Vaiśya father, on wives of the Brhāmaṇa and
Kṣatriya castes, the *Vaidehaka* and the *Māgadha* respectively;—from
the Kṣatriya father, on a wife of the Brāhmaṇa caste, the *Sūta*. These
are the sons born of the irregular mixtures. From *Ugra* father and
*Niṣāda* mother is born the *Kukkuṭaka*; from *Niṣāda* father and *Ugra*
mother, the *Pulkasa*; from *Ambaṣṭha* father and *Vaidehika* mother is
born the *Vaiṇa*; from *Vaidehika* father and *Ambaṣṭha* mother is born
the *Kuśīlava*; from *Kṣattṛ* mother and *Ugra* father, is born
*Śvapāka*; by profession, the *Vaiṇa* is the chariot-maker. All these,
with the exception of the *Caṇḍāla*, have the same duties as the Śūdra.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.16.7-12, 16; 1.17.7, 8, 11-14).—‘Sons born of wives of
the second or third lower castes are *Ambaṣṭhas*, *Ugras* and *Niṣādas*.
Of females wedded in the inverse order are born *Āyogavas*, *Māgadhas*,
*Vaiṇas*, *Kṣattṛs*, *Pulkasas*, *Kukkuṭas*, *Vaidehakas* and
*Caṇḍālas*. An *Ambaṣṭha* begets on a woman of the first caste, a
*Śvapāka*; an *Ugra* on a woman of the second caste, a *Vaiṇa*; a
*Niṣāda* on a woman of the third caste, a *Pulkasa*; in the contrary
case, a *Kukkuṭaka* is produced. I may quote the following—“Those sons
whom an uninitiated man begets, the wise call *Vrāṭyas*, who are
excluded from the *Śāvitrī*.” A Brāhmana begets on a woman of the
Ksatriya caste, a Brāhmaṇa; on a woman of the Vaiśya caste, an
*Ambaṣṭha*; on a woman of the Śūdra caste, a *Niṣāda*,—according to
some, a *Pāraśava*. A Kṣatriya begets on a female of the Vaiśya caste, a
Kṣatriya; on a female of the Śūdra caste, an *Ugra*. A Vaiśya begets on
a female of the Śūdra caste, a *Rathakāra*. A Śūdra begets on a female
of the Vaiśya caste, a *Magadha*; on a female of the Kṣatriya caste, a
*Kṣattṛ*; but on a female of the Brāhmaṇa caste, a *Caṇḍāla*. A Vaiśya
begets on a female of the Kṣatriya caste, an *Āyogava*; on a female of
the Brāhmaṇa caste, a *Sūta*. If among these a n *Ambaṣṭha* male and an
*Ugra* female unite, their son shall be born in the regular order; if a
*Kṣattṛ* male and a *Vaidehaka* female unite the son born shall be in
the inverse order. An *Ugra* begets on a female of the *Kṣattṛ* caste, a
*Śvapāka*; a *Vaidehaka* on a female of the *Ambaṣṭha* caste, a *Vaiṇa*;
a *Niṣāda* on a female of the *Śūdra* caste, a *Pulkasa*; a *Śūdra* on a
woman of the *Niṣāda* caste, a *Kukkuṭaka*.—The wise declare that those
sprung from an intermixture of castes are *Vrātyas*.’

*Āpastamba* (2.13.1-5).—‘If a man approaches a woman who had been
married to another man, or was not legally married to himself, they both
commit sin;—through their sin, their son also becomes sinful.’

*Gautama* (4.16, 21).—‘Children born in the regular order of wives of
the next second or third lower castes are of the same caste as the
father, and these are *Ambaṣṭhas*, *Ugras*, *Niṣādas* and *Dauśyantas*
or *Pāraśavas*.—Children born in the inverse order of wives of higher
castes, are *Sūtas*, *Māgadhas*, *Āyogavas*, *Kṣattṛs*, *Vaidehakas* and
*Caṇḍālas*. Some declare that a woman of the Brāhmaṇa caste bears
respectively to the husband of the four castes, sons who are Brāhmaṇas,
*Sūtas*, *Māgadhas* and *Caṇḍālas*; and that a woman of the Kṣatriya
caste bears to the same, *Mūrdhābhiṣiktas*, *Kṣatriyas*, *Dhīvaras*,
*Pulkasas*;—a woman of the Vaiśya caste to the same, *Bhṛjyakaṇṭhas*,
*Māhiṣyas*, *Vaiśyas*, and *Vaidehas*;—and a woman of the Śūdra caste,
to the same, *Pāraśavas*, *Yavanas*, *Karanas* and Śūdras.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (18.19).—‘They declare that the offspring of a Śūdra father
and Brāhmaṇa mother is *Caṇḍāla*,—that of Śūdra father and Kṣatriya
mother, the *Vaiṇa*,—that of Śūdra father and Vaisya mother, the
*Anlyāvasāyin*;—they declare that the son of a Vaisya father and
Brāhmaṇa mother is the *Rāmaka*; that of Vaisya father and Kṣatriya
mother, the *Pulkasa*; that of Kṣatriya father and Brāhmaṇa mother is
the *Sūta*. They quote the following—“One may know by their deeds those
who have been begotten secretly, and to whom the stigma of springing
from unions in the inverse order of the castes attaches; because they
are destitute of virtue and good conduct.”—Children begotten by
Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas and Vaisyas on females of the next lower, second
lower and third lower castes become respectively, the *Ambaṣṭha*, the
*Ugra* and the *Niṣāda*.—The son of a Brāhmaṇa father and Śūdra mother
is the *Pāraśava*.

*Yājñavalkya* (1.91-95).—‘From Brāhmaṇa father and Kṣatriya mother is
born the *Mūrdhābhiṣikta*; from Brāhmaṇa father and Vaiśya mother, the
*Ambaṣṭha*; and from Brāhmaṇa father and Śūdra mother, the *Niṣāda* or
*Pāraśava*.—From Kṣatriya father and Vaiśya or Śūdra mother is born the
*Māhiṣya* or the *Ugra* respectively. From Vaiśya father and Śūdra
mother, the *Karaṇa*. Such is the law regarding children of married
wives.—From Kṣatriya father and Brāhmaṇa mother is born the *Sūta*; from
Vaiśya father and Brāhmaṇa mother, the *Vaidehaka*; from Śūdra father
and Brāhmaṇa mother is born the *Caṇḍāla*, who is outside the pale of
all righteousness.—From Vaiśya father and Kṣatriya mother is born the
*Māgadha*; from Śūdra father and Kṣatriy a mother, the *Kṣattṛ*; from
Śūdra father and Vaiśya mother, the *Āyogava*.—From *Māhiṣya* father and
*Karaṇa* mother is born the *Rathakāra*. The sons born in the inverse
order of castes are declared to he *bad* and those in the regular order,
*good*.’

*Viṣṇu* (16.4.-7, 17).—‘The son of a Śūdra from a Vaiśya woman is called
*Āyogava*;—the *Pulkasa* and *Māgadha* are sons of a Vaiśya and Śūdra
respectively from a Kṣatriya woman.—The *Caṇḍāla*, *Vaidehaka* and
*Sūta* are the sons of a Śūdra, Vaiśya and Kṣatriya respectively, from a
Brāhmaṇa woman.—Besides these there are innumerable other castes
produced by further intermixture among those that have been just
mentioned.... All members of mixed castes, whether their descent has
been kept secret or is generally known, may be found out by their
deeds.’

*Mahābhārata* (13.48.14-28, 49).—(On lines similar to Manu.)

*Nārada* (12.103-113).—‘There are *Anantara*, *Ekāntara* and *Dvyantara*
sons, both in the direct and inverse order of the castes. Of this
description are the *Ugra, Pāraśava*, and *Niṣāda*, who are begotten in
the direct order; as well as *Ambaṣṭha*, *Māgadha* and *Kṣattṛ*, who
spring from a Kṣatriya woman. One of these latter is begotten in the
direct order; of the two others, it must be known that they are begotten
in an inverse order. The *Kṣattṛ* and the rest are begotten in an
inverse order; the three mentioned first, in the direct, order. The son
of a Brāhmaṇa father and Brāhmaṇa mother is equal in caste to the
father. The son of a Brāhmaṇa from a Kṣatriya woman is an *Anantara*;—an
*Ambaṣṭha* and an *Ugra* are begotten in the same way by Kṣatriya men
and on Vaiśya women respectively. An *Ambaṣṭha* is an *Ekāntara*, the
son of a Brāhmaṇa father from a Vaiśya woman. The son called *Niṣāda*
springs from the union of a Kṣatriya with a Śūdra woman. A Śūdra woman
obtains from a Brāhmaṇa a son called *Pāraśava*, who is superior to the
*Niṣāda*. The *Sūta*, the *Māgadha*, the *Āyogava*, the *Kṣattṛ* and the
*Vaidehaka* are begotten in the inverse order of castes. The *Sūta* is
an *Anantara* begotten by a Kṣatriya on a Brāhmaṇa woman. Similarly the
*Māgadha* and *Āyogava* are respectively the sons of Vaiśya and Śūdra
fathers from a Brāhmaṇa mother. A Brāhmaṇa woman obtains from a Vaiśya
father an *Ekāntara* son, called the *Vaidehaka*. A Kṣatriya woman
obtains from a Śūdra, an *Ekāntara* son, called the *Kṣattṛ*. A
*Dvyantara* son in the inverse order, the most abject of men, being the
fruit of sinful intercourse, by name *Caṇḍāla*, is born of a Śūdra when
a Brāhmaṇa woman forgets herself with him.’

*Śukranīti* (4.4, 71-72).—‘Sons born of Vaiśya women and Kṣatriya or
Brāhmaṇa fathers should be treated as *Śūdra*; also those born of Śūdra
mothers.’
