+++
title = "063 अहिंसा सत्यम्"

+++
*Yājñavalkya* (1.122).—‘Abstention from injury, Truthfulness, Abstention
from theft, Purity, Control of the senses, Liberality, Self-control,
Mercy, Tolerance,—these are the means of righteousness for all men.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 164).—‘Freedom from cruelty, Abstention from
injury, Kindness, Liberality, Performance of Śrāddha, Honouring guests,
Truthfulness, Freedom from anger, Contentment with one’s own wife,
Purity, Freedom from envy, Self-knowledge and Patience are the common
virtues...... Truth, Self-control, Austerity, Purity, Contentment,
Shyness, Tolerance, Straightforwardness, Wisdom, Calmness, Mercy,
Concentrated mind—these constitute the eternal Dharma.—That is *Truth*
which is beneficial to living beings; *Self-Control* consists in
controlling the mind; *Austerity* consists in remaining firm in one’s
own duty; *Purity* consists in the evading of inter-mixtures;
*Contentment* consists in giving up objects of sense; *Shyness* consists
in desisting from evil deeds; *Tolerance* consists in the capacity to
bear the pairs of opposites; *Straightforwardness* consists in balance
of mind; *Wisdom* consists in discerning the true nature of things;
*Calmness* consists in peacefulness of mind; *Mercy* consists in the
inclination to do good to living beings;—this is eternal Dharma.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘Mercy, Tolerance, Freedom from envy, Purity,
Abstention from over-exertion, Propitiousness, Freedom from miserliness,
Freedom from desires,—these are common to all men.—When one protects
another person in times of trouble,—whether he be a stranger or a
relation, an enemy or a friend,—this is what is meant by *Mercy*.
*Tolerance* is that by virtue of which one does not become angry on
suffering pain. When one does not feel unhappy at the good qualities of
another, and eulogises even those whose qualities are not of the
best;—this is called *Freedom from envy*. *Purity* consists in avoiding
forbidden food and in associating with blameless persons. When one
avoids those acts which, though good, bring suffering to the body, that
is *Abstention from over-exertion*. *Propitiousness* consists in doing
what is good and desisting from what is not commended. *Freedom from
Miserliness* is that by virtue of which one gives away, without pain,
even the little that he possesses. *Freedom from Desires* is that by
which one remains contented with whatever he obtains, without thinking
of what others have got.’

*Gautama* (8.22-23).—‘Now follow the eight qualities of the
soul—Compassion on all creatures, Forbearance, Freedom from anger,
Purity, Quietism, Propitiousness, Freedom from avarice and Freedom from
covetousness.’

*Āpastamba* (1.23-6).—‘Freedom from anger, from exultation, from
grumbling, from covetousness, from perplexity, from hypocrisy and
hurtfulness,—Truthfulness, Moderation in eating, Silencing slander,
Freedom from envy, Self-denying, Liberality, Avoiding of gifts,
Uprightness, Affability, Extinction of the passions, Subjugation of the
senses, Peace with all beings, Concentration of mind, Regulation of
conduct according to the Āryas, Peacefulness and Contentment;—these good
qualities have been settled by the agreement of the wise for all the
four orders. He who, according to the precepts of the sacred Law,
practises these, enters the Universal Self.’

*Viṣṇu* (2.16-17).—‘Forbearance, Veracity, Restraint, Purity,
Liberality, Self-control, Avoiding the killing of animals, Obedience to
elders, Pilgrimage, Sympathy with the afflicted,—Straightforwardness,
Freedom from covetousness, Reverence towards God and Brāhmaṇas, and
Freedom from anger are duties common to all.’
