+++
title = "074 ब्राह्मणा ब्रह्मयोनिस्था"

+++
**(verses 10.74-76)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.13-14).—‘The lawful occupations of the Brāhmaṇa are six:
studying the Veda, teaching, sacrificing for himself, sacrificing for
others, giving gifts and accepting gifts.’

*Gautama* (10.1-3).—‘The lawful occupations common to all twice-born men
are—studying the Veda, offering sacrifices for themselves and giving
gifts.—Teaching, offering sacrifices for others and accepting gifts are
the additional occupations for the Brāhmaṇa.—But the former three are
obligatory.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.18.2).—‘Brahman forsooth, placed Its majesty in the
Brāhmaṇas, together with the duties and privileges of studying,
teaching, sacrificing for themselves, sacrificing for others, giving
gifts and accepting gifts,—for the protection of the Vedas.’

*Āpastamba* (2.10.4-5).—‘The lawful occupations of the Brāhmaṇa
are—studying, teaching, sacrificing for himself, sacrificing for others,
giving gifts, receiving gifts, inheriting and gleaning corn in the
fields; and he may live by taking other things that belong to nobody.’

*Viṣṇu* (2.5, 9, 11).—‘For a Brāhmaṇa, to teach the Veda,—to sacrifice
and to study the Veda,—for a Brāhmaṇa, to sacrifice for others and to
receive gifts.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.118).—‘Sacrificing, studying and giving gifts are
common to the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya; for the Brāhmaṇa
there are in addition to these, accepting gifts, sacrificing for others
and teaching.’

*Śukranīti* (4.3.31-32).—‘Sacrificing, studying, giving gifts,—these are
the functions of the twice-born;—the additional special functions of the
Brāhmaṇa are—receiving gifts, teaching and sacrificing for others.’

*Kāmandaka* (2.18-19).—‘The celebration of sacrifices, the study of the
Vedas, and the giving away of wealth to others, according to the rules
of the Śāstras,—these are considered to be the common customary
observances of the three castes, Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya and Vaiśya.—The holy
acts of teaching, of conducting sacrifices for others, and of accepting
gifts from the pious—these have been enumerated by the sages to be the
means of livelihood for those belonging to the highest caste.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 29).—‘The special duty of the Brāhmaṇa is to study, to
teach, to sacrifice for himself, to sacrifice for others, to give gifts
and to receive gifts.’
