+++
title = "077 त्रयो धर्मा"

+++
**(verses 10.77-80)  
**

[\[See texts under 9.326 *et
seq*.\]](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc201719.html#comparative-notes)

*Gautama* (10.1, 7, 15, 49).—‘The occupations common to all the
twice-born are—studying, offering sacrifices, and giving gifts,—to
protect all beings is the additional function of the king (Kṣatriya),
and to learn the management of chariots and the use of the bow;—the
additional occupations of the Vaiśya are agriculture, trade,
cattle-tending, and money-lending.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.18.3, 4).—‘In the Kṣatriya, the Brāhmaṇa placed
strength, together with the duties and privileges of studying,
sacrificing, giving gifts, using weapons and protecting the life and
property of all beings,—for the growth of good government.—In the
Vaiśyas, the Brāhmaṇa placed the power to work, with the duties of
studying, sacrificing, giving gifts, cultivating the soil, trading, and
cattle-tending,—for the growth of productive labour.’

*Āpastamba* (2.10.6, 7).—‘The lawful occupations of the Kṣatriya are the
same as those of the Brāhmaṇa; with the exception of teaching,
sacrificing for others and receiving gifts; and with the addition of
governing and fighting. The lawful occupations of the Vaiśya are the
same as those of the Kṣatriya, with the exception of governing and
fighting, and with the addition of agriculture, cattle tending and
trade.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.15-19).—‘The lawful occupations of the Kṣatriya are
three—studying, sacrificing for himself and bestowing gifts;—and his
peculiar duty is to protect the people with his weapons; he may earn his
livelihood by that means.—The lawful occupations of the Vaiśya are the
same besides agriculture, trading, cattle-tending and money-lending.’

*Viṣṇu* (2.6, 7, 9, 12, 13).—‘For the Kṣatriya, constant practice in
arms;—for the Vaiśya, the tending of cattle;—for all the twice-born, to
sacrifice and to study;—the mode of livelihood for the Kṣatriya is to
protect the world (and receive due reward);—and for the Vaiśya, tillage,
keeping cows, trade, money-lending and growing of seeds.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.118, 119).—‘Sacrificing, studying and giving gifts are
common to the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya (and the Brāhmaṇa);—the principal
function of the Kṣatriya is the protecting of the people; money-lending,
agriculture, and trade and cattle-tending are the principal functions of
the Vaiśya.’

*Śukranīti* (4.3.33-34).—‘The additional special functions of the
Kṣatriya are the protection of the good, suppression of the wicked and
realising of revenues. The additional functions of the Vaiśya are
agriculture, pasture and trade.’

*Kāmandaka* (1.20).—‘The King (Kṣatriya) should live by his weapons and
by protecting the people. The means of subsistence for the Vaiśya are
cattle-rearing, agriculture and trade.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 29).—‘The duties of the Kṣatriya are studying,
sacrificing, making gilts, living by arms, and protecting of living
beings; of the Vaiśya—studying, sacrificing, giving gifts, agriculture,
cattle-tending and trade.’
