+++
title = "081 अजीवंस् तु"

+++
**(verses 10.81-84)  
**

*Gautama* (7.4-7).—‘In times of distress, it is permissible to offer
sacrifices for men of all castes, to teach them and to accept gifts from
them; each preceding mode of living being preferable to the succeeding.
On failure of the occupations lawful for the Brāhmaṇa, he may live by
the occupations of the Kṣatriya; and on failure of these latter, he may
live by the occupations of the Vaiśya.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.4.16-21).—‘A Brāhmaṇa, who is unable to subsist by
teaching, sacrificing for others or the acceptance of gifts, shall
maintain himself by following the duties of the Kṣatriya, because that
is the next following caste. Gautama declares that the Brāhmaṇa shall
not act thus; for the functions of the Kṣatriya are too cruel for the
Brāhmaṇa. They quote also the following verse:—“Out of regard for the
sacred law, a Brāhmaṇa or a Vaiśya may take up arms for the protection
of cows or Brāhmaṇas, or when a confusion of castes threatens to take
place.” Or, the Brāhmaṇa may adopt the Vaiśya’s means of livelihood;
because that is the one following next. If he lives by agriculture, he
shall plough before breakfast, and with two bulls whose noses have not
been pierced, never striking them with the goad, but frequently coaxing
them.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.22-24, 32-33).—‘Those who are unable to live by their own
lawful occupation may adopt that of the next inferior caste; but never
that of a higher caste. A Brāhmaṇa and a Kṣatriya who have resorted to
the Vaiśya’s mode of livelihood and maintain themselves by trade shall
not sell the following things—stone, &c., &c., &c. For the purpose of
cultivation, he shall plough before breakfast with two bulls whose noses
have not been pierced; if he ploughs in the hot season, he shall water
his beasts even in the morning.’

*Viṣṇu* (2.15).—‘In times of distress, each caste may follow the
occupation of that next to it in rank.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.34).—‘In times of distress, the Brāhmaṇa may maintain
himself by the occupation of the Kṣatriya, or by that of the Vaiśya; but
having tided over the distress, he shall purify himself by expiations
and confine himself to his own path.’

*Mahābhārata* (3.208.23—12.263.44-45).—(Same as Manu 84.)

*Nārada* (1.56-60).—‘In times of distress, a Brāhmaṇa is allowed to gain
his subsistence in the mode prescribed for the caste next to him in
rank; or he may gain his subsistence like a Vaiśya. But he must never
resort to the mode of livelihood prescribed for the lowest caste. At no
time should a Brāhmaṇa follow the occupations of a man of vile caste, or
a vile man the occupations of a Brāhmaṇa; in either case, expulsion from
caste would be the immediate consequence... When a Brāhmaṇa has lived
through the times of distress, with the wealth acquired by following the
occupations of the Kṣatriya, he must perform a penance and relinquish
those occupations. When a Brāhmaṇa takes delight in those occupations
and persists in them, he is declared to be a *Kāṇḍapṛṣṭha* and must be
expelled from society, because he has swerved from the path of duty.’
