+++
title = "085 इदन् तु"

+++
**(verses 10.85-93)  
**

*Gautama* (7.8-15).—‘Goods not to be sold by the Brāhmaṇa are—perfumes,
flavouring substances, prepared food, sesamum, hempen and linen cloth,
skins, garments dyed red or washed, milk and preparations of it, roots,
fruits, flowers, medicines, honey, flesh, grass, water, poisons, animals
for slaughter; nor under any circumstances, human beings, heifers,
female calves, cows big with young. Some declare that traffic in land,
rice, barley, goats, sheep, horses, hulls, milch cows and draught oxen
is also forbidden.’

*Āpastamba* (1.20.10-13).—‘Trade is not lawful for a Brāhmaṇa;—in times
of distress he may trade in lawful merchandise, avoiding the following,
that are forbidden—men, condiments and liquids, colours, perfumes, food,
skins, heifers, glueing substances, water, young corn-stalks, substances
from which spirituous liquor is extracted, red and black pepper, corn,
flesh, arms, and the hope of reward for meritorious deeds. Among the
various kinds of grains, he shall specially not sell sesamum or rice.

*Yājñavalkya* (3.6-38).—‘Fruits, stones, linen, Soma, human beings,
cakes, plants, sesamum, rice, liquids, curds, milk, clarified butter,
water, arms, wine, wax, honey, lac, grass, clay, skins, flowers,
blankets, hairs, *Takra*, poisons, land, silken cloth, indigo, salt,
one-hoofed animals, lead, vegetable, pepper, medicines, oil-cake,
animals, perfumes,—these the Brāhmaṇa should never sell, even when
living by the occupations of the Vaiśya. But sesamum may be sold for
religious purposes, in exchange of paddy.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.2.27-29).—‘He who sells sesamum, forsooth, sells his
ancestors; he who sells rice, forsooth, sells his life; he who gives
away his daughter, making a bargain, forsooth, sells portions of his
spiritual merit. Grass and wood in their natural state may be sold. They
quote the following—“Animals that have only one row of teeth, as well as
minerals excepting salt, and undyed thread,—these, O Brāhmaṇa, are the
goods thou art permitted to sell.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (2.24-31).—‘A Brāhmaṇa and a Kṣatriya, who have resorted to a
Vaiśya’s mode of living and maintain themselves by trade, shall not sell
stones, salt, hempen cloth, silk, linen and skins; nor any kind of dyed
clothing; nor prepared food, flowers, fruit, roots, perfumes, substances
(used for) flavouring (food); nor water, the juice extracted from
plants; nor Soma, weapons, poison, nor flesh, nor milk, nor preparations
of it, iron, tin, lac, and lead. Now they quote also (the following
verse): By (selling) flesh, lac, and salt a Brāhmaṇa at once becomes an
outcast; by selling milk he becomes (equal to) a Śūdra after three days.
Among tame animals those with uncloven hoofs, and those that have an
abundance of hair (must not be sold), nor any wild animals, (nor) birds,
nor beasts that have tusks (or fangs). Among the various kinds of grain
they mention sesamum (as forbidden). Now they quote also (the following
verse)—If he applies sesamum to any other purpose but food, anointing
and charitable gifts, he will be born again as a worm and, together with
his ancestors, be plunged into his own ordure.—Or, at pleasure, they may
sell (sesamum), if they themselves have produced it by tillage.’

*Viṣṇu* (54.18-21).—‘He who sells fresh ginger, edible plants, perfumes,
flowers, fruits, roots, skins, canes, things made of split bamboo,
chaff, potsherds, hair, ashes, bone, cow-milk or curds, oil-cakes,
sesamum or oil, must perform the *Prājāpatya*. He who sells the fruit of
the *śleśmātaka* tree, lac, bees-wax, shells, mother-o-pearl, tin, lead,
iron, copper, or sacrificial vessels made of rhinoceros’ horn, must
perform the *Cāndrāyaṇa*. He who sells dyed cloth, tin, precious stones,
perfumes, sugar, honey, liquids or condiments, or wool must fast for
three days. He who sells meat, salt, lac or milk must perform the
*Cāndrāyaṇa*. And all these persons should undergo initiation a second
time.’
