+++
title = "001 राजधर्मान् प्रवक्ष्यामि"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 10), which adds
the following notes:—We proceed to consider the exact meaning of the
term ‘*rājan*’,—the question for determination being—(A) Is the name
‘rājā’ applied to any and every one doing the work of ‘protecting the
people?’ (B) or only to one simply belonging to the *Kṣatriya* caste (C)
or to that *Kṣatriya* alone who is duly anointed?

—Now in support of (A) we have the following arguments:—In popular usage
the name ‘*rājā*’ is applied to any one who owns and performs ‘*rājya*,’
the functions of the *rājā*, king; and these functions are actually
performed by the Brāhmaṇa and other castes also. In the *Nirukta* the
etymological meaning of ‘*rājā*’ is explained as ‘*rājate*,’ ‘one who
shines,’ *i.e*.,with royal glory; and this glory results only from the
proper ‘protection of the people.’ The Veda also speaks of *Soma* as
‘the *rājā* of Brāhmaṇas,’ and again as ‘the *rājā* among the
Gandharvas’;—in all these passages the term stands for the ‘lord,’ the
‘protector of the people.’

—In support of (B), the view that the term is applicable to the Kṣatriya
caste, we have the following arguments:—Manu, having introduced the
subject as ‘I am going to describe *Rājadharma*’ goes on to describe
such duties as the protecting of the people and so forth, all of which
pertains to the *Kṣatriya*, as is dear from the next verse which speaks
of ‘protection’ as the principal ‘*rājadharma*’; from all which it is
dear that it is the *Kṣatriya* alone that is entitled to ‘*rājya*,’ the
‘functions of the *Rājā*.’

It is in view of the ‘protection of the people’ being his duty that the
*Kṣatriya* alone is entitled to carry arms and to make a living by arms.
Yājñavalkya clearly declares ‘protecting of the people’ as the
‘principal duty *of the Kṣatriya*.’ Paṇini also lays down the affix
‘*ṣyañ*’ in the term ‘*rājya*’ in the sense of ‘function’ of the *rājā*,
*i.e*., the *Kṣatriya*. Anointing also has been prescribed for the
*Kṣatriya* only; the texts speak of the ‘anointing of the *Rājā*,’ which
means that the ceremony is to be performed by one who is already a Rājā;
and this can be true only of the *Kṣatriya* who alone is a ‘*rājā*’
(*i.e*., Kṣatriya) even *before being anointed*. Thus the primary
denotation of the term resting in the *Kṣatriya* only, whenever it is
applied to such Brāhmaṇas and other castes as do the work of the
‘*rājā*’ it should be understood to be used in a secondary or figurative
sense.

—(C) The third view has been held by Medhātithi and Kulllūka, both of
whom hold that the term is applicable to ‘any man who is equipped with
anointment and such other qualifications, and who does the work of
protecting the people.’ So also Haradatta on Gautamasūtra, and
*Mitākṣarā*, the latter applying it to such ‘Householder as is equipped
with anointment and other qualifications.’ On the ground of commonsense
also the duties laid down for the ‘*Rājā*’ must be taken as pertaining
to every one who has to do the work of ‘protecting the people.’ If they
did not, then what would be there for the guidance of those
*non-Kṣatriyas* who happen to be kings of men? *Aparārka* also declares
that the duties prescribed pertain to these *non-Kṣatriyas* also; though
it holds that the name ‘*rājā*’ is applicable only to that *Kṣatriya*
who has been anointed.

Having stated the arguments for the three views, the author declares his
own conclusion as that the word ‘*rājan*’ in the present context must
apply to *one on whom devolves the duty of protecting the people*;—which
is the first of the three views stated above.

See in this connection the *Aveṣṭyadhikaraṇa* (Mīmāṃsā-sūtra, 2.3.3.),
where the conclusion is that the word ‘*rājan*’ is rightly and directly
denotative of the *Kṣatriya*, and as the ‘protecting of the people’ is
prescribed in law-books as the duty of the *Kṣatriya*, this ‘protection’
has come to be called ‘*Rājya*’ (Kingship) the ‘function of the King’;
and thus when other castes are found, by chance, to perform this
function, they have the title ‘*rājā*’ applied to them only
metaphorically.—As for ‘anointment’, the *Tantravārtika* (Trans. p. 822)
remarks that this also is prescribed for the *Kṣatriya* only. (See in
this connection *Tantravārtika*, Trans. pp. 815-831, where the whole
subject is discussed in detail).

Though such is the conclusion of the Mīmāṃsakas, the commentators on
Manu are agreed that in the present context the term ‘*rājan*’ stands
for any one who performs such functions of the king as ‘protecting the
people’ and so forth. *Aparārka* combines the two views that it applies
to such *Kṣatriyas* as perform the function of protecting the people.

This verse is quoted in *Rājanītiratnākara* (p. 2 b).
