+++
title = "004 इन्द्रानिल-यमार्काणाम् अग्नेश्"

+++
**(verse 7.3)**

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 391), to the effect
that the king is the representative of the strong hand of the Law;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 5), to the effect that the King comes
down to the earth for the suppression of the thief and other
evil-doers;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Lakṣaṇa, p. 195), as to the effect that
the king was created by Brahmā for the purpose of protecting the
people;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 15), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Arājake*’ means ‘without a king’;—in ‘*sarvataḥ*’ the
affix ‘*tasil*’ has the sense of the Ablative, and the word means ‘from
all strong individuals,’—‘*abhidrute*’ means ‘oppressed,’—‘*asya*’ means
‘of this world’;—‘*prabhu*’ is Brahmā. In some places the reading is
‘*vidrute*’ (for ‘*abhidrute*’), which means ‘fallen off from duty’; and
in this case the affix in ‘*sarvataḥ*’ will have the force of the
Locative.—It then goes on to remark that the reading adopted by
Medhātithi is ‘*cakṣurdharmasya sarvasya*’ (in the place of
*rakṣārthamasya sarvasya*’) under which reading ‘*bhayāt*’ will mean
‘through fear of *adharma*,’—‘*dharmasya cakṣuḥ*’ will be the ‘seer,’
*i.e*., the *propagator* ‘of Dharma,’ *i.e*., the king who is known as
the ‘source of Dharma.’

This is quoted in *Rājanītiratnākara* (p. 2a).

**(verse 7.4)**

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 392);—in the same
work (Vyavahāra, p. 5);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 6), which
explains that ‘*anila*’ is Vāyu, ‘*vitteśa*’ is Kuvera,—‘*mātrā*’ means
portions—‘*nirhṛtya*’ means ‘extracting,’—‘*śāśvatīḥ*’ means ‘most
essential’ or ‘most lasting.’—It adds that this verse may be construed
with verse 3, the construction being ‘*mātrā nirhṛtya* (verse 4)
*rājānamasṛjat*’ (verse 3).

This is quoted along with verses 5 and 6 in *Rājanītiratnākara* (p. 4a).


