+++
title = "069 जाङ्गलं सस्यसम्पन्नम्"

+++
**(verse 7.67)**

‘*Niguḍheṅgitaceṣṭitaiḥ*’—‘By his own hidden gestures and actions’
(Govindarāja);—‘through the gestures and actions of the Confidential
agents of the other party’ (Kullūka); — ‘through men who hide their own
significant gestures and actions’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 188).

**(verse 7.68)**

The *Bhāṣya* on this verse has not been seen by us.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 188).

According to Medhātithi (mentioned by Buhler), the verse refers to the
*Ambassador* who should so act as not to bring evil upon his own party;
while according to others it refers to the *king*. Kullūka leaves it
doubtful.

**(verse 7.69)**

‘*Jāṅgalam*’—“The full definition of *Jāṅgala* is, according to a verse
quoted by Govindarāja, Rāghavānanda and Kullūka, as below—‘That country
is called *Jāṅgala* which has little water and grass, where strong
breezes prevail, the heat is great, where rain and the like are
abundant”—Buhler.

‘*Anāvilam*’—‘Where the people are not quarrelsome’ (Medhātithi,
mentioned by Buhler; though the Bhāṣya on this verse also is not found
in any of the printed editions, nor in any of the Mss. consulted by
us);—‘not subject to epidemic diseases’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 197), which quotes
the defintion of ‘*Jāṅgala*’ noted above, and adds that the
qualification that ‘water should be scarce’ is meant to indicate that
such a place would be less likely to be attacked by the enemy; in the
capital itself the supply of water should be abundant. It adds the
following explanatory notes on the text:—The place should be fully
supplied with ‘*shasya*’, *i*. *e*., with rich and fresh supplies of
grains from the autumn, winter, spring and rain harvests;—it should be
‘*āryaprāyam*’, *i.e*., full of virtuous people;—‘*anāvila*’, *i.e*.,
free from all dangers from serpents, tigers and the like,—‘*ramya*,’
agreeable, pleasant,—‘*ānatasāman* *ta*’, ‘having all subsidiary kings
fully won over by gifts of presents and honors’,—and ‘*svājīvya*’,
‘where means of agriculture and trade are easily procurable’;—in
‘*deśamāvaset*,’ the accusative ending is due to the root ‘*vas*’ being
preceded by the preposition ‘*ā*.’


