+++
title = "070 धन्व-दुर्गम् मही-दुर्गम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 406), as describing
the various kinds of fortification;—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1. 320) as
describing the six kinds of fortification;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti,
p. 202);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Lakṣana, p. 239), which adds the
following explanations:—‘*Dhanvadurgam*’ is ‘the fortification in the
midst of a desert’, called ‘*durga*’, because of its inaccessibility due
to absence of water and other difficulties;—it suggests another
explanation of the name—‘*dhanvā*’ is the name of a tract of land devoid
of shelter and water; and a fort that is surrounded by such a tract of
land is ‘*dhanvadurga*’; the meaning being that the king should make his
fort, and then render its vicinity waterless and shelterless. It notes a
third explanation of the name:—‘*Dhanvan*,’ ‘bow,’ indicates the
‘*dhanvin*’, ‘archer’; hence ‘*dhanvadurga*’ would mean a ‘line of
defence consisting of of men armed with bows and arrows This, it says,
is not right; as it involves the necessity of having recourse to
metaphorical explanation; and also because we have never heard of such a
‘fort’; again because such a ‘line of defence’ could be very easily
broken through; and lastly because this would be the same as the
‘*nṛdurga*’ coming later.—‘*Naradurga*’ is the line of defence
consisting of the army; and this consists of elephants, chariots, horses
and archers; and as this also would include archers, the separate name
‘*dhanvadurga*’ could not stand for the same sort of defence.—The
‘*Mahīdurga*’ is the ‘fort made of bricks and stones on the
ground’;—some people explain it as a fort consisting only of an unevenly
rugged tract of land;—the ‘Mahīdurga’ has been thus defined in *Auśanasa
Dhanurveda*—‘That fort is called *Mahīdurga* which consists of a tract
of land, portions of which are very high and others very low; it is
equipped with all accessories, well guarded and filled with all means of
offence and defence’. The ‘*Jaladurga*’ consists of that place which is
surrounded by swift, and unfordable streams of water.—The ‘*Vanadurga*’
is a tract of land surrounded by impenetrable forests and
trees.—‘*Baladurga* or *Nṛdurga*’ is that line of defence which consists
in the dispositions of the army.—The ‘*Giridurga*’ is erected either on
the summit of a mountain, or in a tract of land surrounded by hills.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 72a):—and in
*Nītimayūkha* (p. 64), which adds that Kāmandaka mentions the
*Airaṇadurga* also.


