+++
title = "154 कृत्स्नञ् चाऽष्टविधम्"

+++
‘*Aṣṭavidham karma*’—Medhātithi offers three explanations:—(A)—(1)
Conciliation, (2) Division, (3) Force, (4) Presents, (5) Attempting the
undone, (6) Completing what is done, (7) Bettering what is completed,
(8) Consolidating the fruits of the operation;—(B) (1) Trading routes,
(2) Bridgemaking, (3) Fortification, (4) Strengthening of forts, (5)
Elephant-catching, (6) Mining, (7) Settling unpopulated tracts, and (8)
Clearing forests;—(C)—(1) Revenue-collection, (2) Expenditure, (3)
Dismissing undesirable servants, (4) Prohibiting of wrong, (5) Deciding
difficult points, (6) Inspection of judicial affairs, (7) Inflicting of
punishments, (8) prescribing purificatory penances.—Of these (B) is
adopted by Nandana, and (C) by Govindarājā, Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 411), which
explains that the ‘eightfold business’ has been described by Uśanas, and
it quotes the verses cited by Medhātithi, to which it adds the note that
‘*śuddhi*’ is ‘expiatory penance.’ It proceeds to explain *pañcavarga*
as standing for (1) *kāpālika*, beggar (2) *dāmbhika*, the hypocrite,
(3) *gṛhapati*, the householder (4) *vaidehaka*, and (5) the disguised
hermit; it goes on to point out that it may stand for—(1) The
commencement of an operation, (2) the supply of men, (3) supply of
material, (4) precautionary measures and (5) success.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Kājanīti, p. 159), where also the
verses of Uśanas are quoted, to which the following explanatory notes
are added:—‘*Ādānam*’—*i*.*e*., of taxes and other dues,—‘*visarga*’,
‘making gifts of wealth,’—‘*praiṣa*’ is the activity of the Minister and
others relating to temporal and spiritual matters,—‘*niṣedhaḥ*’,
prohibiting of inimical acts,—‘*anuvacana*’, ‘the king’s orders
regarding doubtful points’—and ‘*śuddhi*’ is ‘expiatory penance.’—it
explains ‘*pañcavarga*’ as consisting of—(1) allies, (2) means of
success, (3) apportionment of time and place, (4) prevention of trouble
and (5) success.

It is quoted again in the same work, on page 317, where also the same
verses from Uśanas are quoted, but with a fuller explanatory
note:—‘*Ādānam*’ is ‘collection of revenue and other dues’,—‘*visarga*’
is ‘the giving away of prizes and other presents’,—‘*preṣa*’ is the
deputing of servants (v.l. *praiṣa*) and others,—‘*arthavacana*’ is
‘taking of measures for amassing wealth’,—some works read, for
‘*arthavacanam*’, ‘*anuvacanam*’, which means ‘the king’s orders on
doubtful points’,—‘*śuddhi*’ regarding Punishments, consists in their
being inflicted in accordance with law; and that regarding the ‘Self’
consists in expiatory penances.—Next it quotes Medhātithi’s first
explanation (A) of the ‘eightfold business and then proceeds to explain
‘*pañcavarga*’ (of the text) as meaning the ‘group consisting of five
spies’, as follows:—(1) Those trustworthy persons who are experts in
geography, arts, languages and so forth, (2) those disguised as dwarfs,
foresters, dumb and deaf, insane or blind, (3) dancers, musicians, and
singers, (4) Ascetics and so forth. It then quotes the other explanation
of ‘*pañcavarga*’ as consisting of allies and the rest (see above).
‘*Aparāgaḥ*’ (of the text) means ‘disaffection’; the sense being that
the king should make it his business to learn everything regarding the
affection and disaffection that there may be among Ministers, Priests,
the Commander-in-Chief, the Heir Apparent, the Porter and others.


