+++
title = "201 जित्वा सम्पूजयेद्"

+++
‘*Parihāra*’—‘Exemptions from taxes and custom-dues etc.’
(Medhātithi);—‘gifts to the gods and Brāhmaṇas’ (Govindarāja and
Kullūka);—‘gifts of clothes and ornaments to the inhabitants’
(Rāghavānanda).

“The term ‘*parihāra*’ occurs very frequently in the inscriptions (see
*e*. *g*., Arch. Reports of Western India, Vol. IV, p.104 *et*.
*seq*),and means ‘exemption from, taxes and payments as well as other
immunities’. These *parihāras* were regularly attached to all grants to
Brāhmaṇas or temples”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 403) in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 409), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Jitvā*,’ ‘having conquered the enemy’s territories’,—‘*devān
dhārmikān brāhmaṇān*’—*i*.*e*., those inhabiting the conquered
country—‘*sampūjayet*’,—‘he should worship’, *i*.*e*., ‘offer them
lands, gold, presents and honours’;—‘*parihārān*’ means ‘explanations of
his own action in conquering the country, such as it was not through
greed for conquest that I have conquered this kingdom, this king of
yours wronged me deeply, that is why I have conquered him—thereby
showing that he is not to blame;—or ‘*paṛhāra*’ may mean ‘gifts’, such
proclamations, for instance, as ‘all the gold and wealth that I have won
I present to the Brāhmaṇas’;—similary he should proclaim such amnesty as
‘all those who, through loyalty to their late king, acted against, me,
only did their duty, and they need not fear any retaliation from me’.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 73 a).


