+++
title = "211 आर्यता पुरुषज्ञानम्"

+++
**(verse 7.206)**

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrddaya* (Rājanīti, p. 412), which adds
the following notes:—The particle ‘*vā*’ indicates that what the verse
is speaking of is the alternative to war;—‘*prayatnato yuktaḥ*,’ ‘having
become fully equipped with all the equipments, such as sending the
ambassador and so forth, necessary for marching on the conquering
expedition,’—‘*saha*’, ‘with the enemy,’—‘*sandhim* *kṛtvā*,’ ‘having
made peace’;—‘*sampaśyan*,’ ‘rightly discerning,’ the ‘*triple result*’
in the shape of ‘friend, gold and territory’, and hence making peace on
the acquisition of any one of these three, he should ‘depart’, return to
his own kingdom.

**(verse 7.207)**

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya*, (Rājanīti, p. 412), which adds
the following notes:—‘*Maṇḍale*,’ ‘in the circle of twelve enemies’;—the
‘*pārṣṇigrāha*’, is the enemy whose territory lies immediately in the
rear of the king who is marching on an expedition against a state in his
front;—‘*ākranda*’ is the king whose territory lies behind that of the
said *pārsṇigraha*,—‘*samprekṣya*’, ‘having duly examined the strength
and weakness of both these’;—‘*mitrāt*’, ‘from the king against whom he
was marching and with whom he has made peace;’—‘*amitrāt*’, ‘from the
enemy against whom he was marching and who has not made peace with
him’,—the king undertaking the expedition shall obtain the point of his
expedition—in the shape either of victory over the enemy, or one of the
‘three results’ of *peace, in the shape of* ‘*fri* *end, gold and
territory*.’

**(verse 7.208)**

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 277);—and in
*Rājanītiratnākara* (p. 29a).

**(verse 7.209)**

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 277).

**(verse 7.210)**

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 743), as describing the
‘dangerous enemy’;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Lakṣaṇa, p. 218);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 323).

**(verse 7.211)**

‘*Sthaulalakṣyam*’—‘Great liberality’ (Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa, Rāghavānanda
and Nandana);—Kullūka asserts that both Govindarāja and Medhātithi
explain the term as being ‘not sharp-sighted.’ As regards Medhātithi,
whose explanation Buhler could not decipher, his words
are—‘*Sthūlalakṣaḥ prabhūtasyāpi arthameṣām sarvakālam kṣamate*’, which
means that the man who is ‘*sthūlalakṣa*’ looks with equanimity upon the
ever-increasing prosperity of these (*i.e*., other kings). This may
imply *absence of sharp-sightedness*.—Hopkins says “Medhātīthi and
Govindarāja erroneously interpret as *subtility*”. While Govindarāja is
said by Buhler to explain the term to mean ‘*sūkṣmadars-hitvam* but this
is evidently wrong; as the *initial* ‘*a*’ Buhler has failed to notice
in the manuscript

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitṛodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 323).


