+++
title = "008 अनिर्दशाया गोः"

+++
‘*Sandhinī*’—‘a cow that gives milk only once a day’ (Medhātithi, and
Govindarāja);—‘a cow in heat’ (Kullūka, who quotes Hārita in support,
Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda);—‘a cow big with calf’ (Nandana);—‘a cow
whose own calf being dead, is milked with the help of another’s calf’
(‘some one’ mentioned in Medhātithi.)

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.290), where it is said that
the unintentional drinking of these milks, if done once only, makes one
liable to the penance of a single day’s fast, while if done
intentionally, or if repeated, it entails a three days’ fast.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 712), where the
‘*Sandhinī*’ is described as ‘the cow that approaches the bull *i.e*.,
the cow in heat’,—and the ‘*anirdaśā*’ as ‘the one that has not passed
more than ten days since delivery.’

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 448), which adds the
following:—‘*anirdaśā*’ is that which has not passed ten days since its
delivery;—the ‘cow’ stands for the goat and the buffallo
also;—‘*ekaśapha*’ are the horse and other one-hoofed animals;—the
‘*sandhinī*’ is the cow that seeks for the bull; the avoiding of the
second ‘*goḥ*’ in the second line indicates that it is the milk of the
*cow* only that has lost its calf, and not that of the goat or the
buffalo.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 525), which adds the
following:—‘*nirdaśā*’ is the cow that has passed ten days since
delivery;—‘*ekaśapha*’ are the horse and other one-hoofed
animals—‘*āvika*’ is ‘the milk of the ewe’;—‘*sandhinī*’ is the cow in
heat;—‘*vivatsā*’ is one devoid of her calf.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 929), which contains the same
remarks as *Mitākṣarā*;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Śrāddha p. 13a)—in
*Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 567);—in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 328), which explains
‘*ekaśapha*’ as standing for the Horse and the like, and ‘*Sandhinī*’ as
the cow ‘which has been covered by the bull’;—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka*
(p. 335).


