+++
title = "016 पाठीन-रोहिताव् आद्यौ"

+++
Medhātithi and Govindarāja explain the meaning to be that “The Pāṭhīna
and the Rohita are to be eaten only when offered to the gods or Pitṛs,
and not ordinarily, while those enumerated in the second half are to be
eaten ‘*sarvasaḥ*’ at all times.”—Kullūka objects to this explanation on
the following grounds:—There is no authority for the view that the two
kinds of fish are to be offered at Śrāddhas, eaten only by the person
invited at it, not by the performer of the Śrāddha or other persons,
while the other kinds are to be eaten by others also;—in fact all other
authorities have placed all those mentioned here on the same footing.
Kullūka’s own explanation is as follows:—‘The *Pāṭhīna* and the *Rohita*
should be eaten, *as also* the *Rājīva* and the rest’;—and the phrase
‘*niyuktau havyakavyoḥ*’ he takes as standing by itself, in the sense
that ‘all things that are forbidden may be eaten, when one is threatened
with starvation, after they have been offered to the gods and Pitṛs.’

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.178), which goes one farther
than Medhātithi, and adds that those enumerated in the second line also
are to be eaten only when offered at Śrāddhas and sacrifices;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 547), which adds the following
notes:—‘*ādyau*’ means ‘are to be eaten’—when they are
‘*niyuktau*’—*i.e*., used for the purpose of *Śrāddha* and other
offerings;—‘*Pāṭhīna*’ is that which is also called ‘*Chandraka*,’
‘*Rājīva*’ is red-coloured, ‘*Siṃhatuṇḍa*,’ is that which has its mouth
like the lion’s, ‘*Saśalka*’ are fish covered with shell-like skin.

It is quoted in *Smṛtattva* (p. 449);—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p.
577);—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 300), which explains ‘*niyuktau*,’ as
employed for Śrāddha and other purposes, and ‘*ādyau*’ as ‘may be
eaten,’ ‘*rājīva*’ as red-coloured.


