+++
title = "027 प्रोक्षितम् भक्षयेन्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 527), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Prokṣita*’ is that which has been sanctified by means
of *mantras* for being offered at a sacrifice;—‘*brāhmaṇānañca
kāmyayā*’—when one is pressed by a Brāhmaṇa to eat meat, if he eats it
but *once*, then there is no harm; that this is justifiable *once* only
is clearly stated by Yama; if the same Brāhmaṇa should press him again,
then he is not to accede to this; nor is he to eat it, even though the
second time he may be pressed by another Brāhmaṇa; that he is to eat it
*once* does not mean that he is to take a *single morsel*; what is meant
is that he may eat at a single meal;—‘*Yathāvidhiniyuktaḥ*’—this, means
that when invited to the *Madhuparka-offering* or to a *Śrāddha*, one
may eat even unconsecrated meat;—‘*prāṇānāmeva cātyaye*’—meat may be
eaten if during an illness, or during food-scarcity, one’s life would be
in danger if meat were not taken.

The verse is quoted also in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 449), which explains
‘*prokṣitam*’ as which has been duly consecrated by means of *mantras*,
being obtained from an animal killed in connection with a sacrificial
performance;—‘*brāhmaṇānām kāmya*’—at the wish of a Brāhmaṇa one may eat
once;—‘*yathāvidhiniyuktaḥ*’—*i*. *e*., at a *Śrāddha*;—in the
*Prāyścittaviveka* (p. 280), which notes that ‘*prāṇānāmeva cātyaye*’ is
meant to refer to Religious Students and to such House-holders as have
renounced meat;—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 300).


