+++
title = "037 कुर्याद् घृतपशुम्"

+++
‘*Saṅge*’—‘On an occasion arising for the killing of an animal (at a
rite other than those laid down in the Veda)’ (Medhātithi);—‘if one has
a strong desire to eat meat’ (Kullūka and Nārāyanā). \[It is difficult
to see how a strong desire for meat could be appeased by eating animal
made of butter or flour\];—‘in the event of one being attacked by evil
spirits’ (Govindarāja);—‘on the occasion of social gatherings’
(Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 538), which quotes
*Kalpataru* as offering the following explanation:—In such ceremonies as
the *Sītāyajña* and the like, which are not prescribed in the Veda, and
the killing of animals at which, therefore, cannot have the sanction of
the Veda,—if, in view of the prevalent custom, it is found necessary to
sacrifice an animal, one should offer an animal made either of butter or
of flour;—it then quotes Kullūka’s explanation,—and then the one given
by Medhātithi, remarking that this last is in agreement with
*Kalpataru*,—It then goes on to describe another explanation, by which
‘*Saṅge*’ means ‘at a sacrifice’ and this is explained as laying down an
alternative to the killing of animals at the well-known sacrifices,
*Agnīṣṭomīya* and the rest.—This last explanation, the author rejects,
on the ground (1) that there is no authority for taking the word
‘*saṅge*’ in the sense of *sacrifice*, and (2) that it would not be
right for a *Smṛti* to lay down an alternative to a detail that has been
laid down in the original Vedic injunction of the sacrifices.
