+++
title = "056 न मांस-भक्षणे"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 719) in support of
the view that it is only the eating of prohibited meat that is
sinful;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 537), which adds the
following notes:—‘*māṃse*’—*i.e*., such meat as is not
forbidden;—‘*madye*’—for the *Kṣatriya* and other lower castes
;—‘*maithune*’—*i.e*., such sexual intercourse as is not
prohibited;—‘*nivṛttiḥ*’—*i.e*., the determination to
renounce;—‘*mahāphalā*’—*i.e*., conducive to the attainment of Heaven
and such other results as have been mentioned in the foregoing
*arthavāda* passages. *Medhātithi* has remarked that the determination
to renounce meat and other things must be regarded as conducive to
Heaven only, on the basis of the principle of the Viśvajit
(*Mīmāṃsā-sūtra* 4.3.15-16). But this is not right, as it is very much
simpler to accept the rewards mentioned in the *arthavāda* passages as
the rewards meant here, rather than assume one on the basis of the said
principle.

It is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 277), which remarks that this
refers, to such meat as is left, after the offerings to the gods and
Pitṛs have been made;—as regards wine, the abandoning of it is
‘conducive to great rewards’ only for those for whom wine is not
forbidden,—and as regards ‘sexual intercourse,’ the abandoning that
leads to great rewards is that of the intercourse which is sanctioned
‘on all except the sacred days,’ and ‘that for the sake of pleasure.’
