+++
title = "059 दशाहं शावम्"

+++
“The commentators are of the opinion that the length of the period of
the impurity depends on the status of the mourner; and that a man who
knows the mantras only of one *Śākhā* shall be impure during four days,
one who knows a whole *Śākhā* (or two Vedas) during three days, one who
knows the Veda (or three Vedas) and keeps three or five sacred fires,
during one day. Medhātithi however mentions another interpretation,
according to which the four periods correspond to the four ages of the
deceased, which have been mentioned in the preceding verse. According to
this view, the Sapiṇḍas shall mourn for an initiated person for ten
days,—for one who had received the tonsure, four days, and so
forth.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 893), which explains the first
half to mean that the *Sapiṇḍas* are impure for ten days, and the second
half as laying down three other alternatives;—‘*Arvāk* (or as it reads
*ā vā*) *sañcayanāt asthnām*’ it explains as indicating the period of
*four days*, the fourth day being prescribed for the collecting of the
bones of the dead. Thus the four alternative periods are—ten days, four
days, three days and one day; and the rule regarding the restriction of
one or the other is thus laid down by *Parāśara*—‘The Brāhmaṇa equipped
with both the Veda and the Fire becomes pure in *one* day, one equipped
with the Veda only in *three* days, and one without qualifications in
ten days.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.29), which remarks that the four
periods here specified are meant respectively for the
‘*Kusūladhānyaka*,’ the ‘*Kumbhīdhānyaka*,’ the *Tryahaihika*’ and the
‘*Aśvastanika*’ (described in 4.7 above). It quotes Parāśara’s rule
(just quoted), but rejects it as unacceptable.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 391), and again on p. 426;—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (pp. 226 and 229);—in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 116);—in
*Hāralatā* (p. 3) which reads ‘*āsthi*’ and explains it as meaning ‘four
days’;—and in *Śuddhimayūkha* (p. 37).


