+++
title = "060 सपिण्डता तु"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 893), as providing the
definition of the ‘*Samānodaka*’ relationship, and explains the meaning
to be that this relationship subsists among all those people who clearly
recognise a common ancestor;—in *Mitākṣarā* (on 1.253);—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 590);—in *Vyāvahāramayūkha* (p. 63) which,
construes ‘*Saptame*’ as ‘*Saptame atīte*,’ so that the seventh also
becomes included in ‘*Sapiṇḍa*’ relationship;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p.
427);—in *Śuddhimayūkha* (p. 37), which says that ‘*vinivartate*’ is to
be construed with the second line also;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 230),
which says that from the point where ‘*Samānodaka*’ relationship ceases,
‘*Sagotra*’ relationship alone remains;—in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 104),
which quotes Medhātithi to the effect that all those who are descended
from the great-grandfather of one’s own great-grandfather are his
‘Sapiṇḍas’;—in *Hāralatā* (p. 96), which has the following note:—Six
ancestors beginning from one’s father are *his* ‘Sapiṇḍa,’ the seventh
ancestor is not ‘*Sapiṇḍa*’; and the reason for this lies in the fact
that one’s three immediate ancestors—father, grandfather and
great-grandfather—are entitled to receive the ‘piṇḍa’ from him, and the
next three ancestors—*i*. *e*., the father, grandfather and
great-grandfather of the great-grandfather,—are entitled to the
‘smearings of his piṇḍa;’ while the seventh ancestor is not entitled to
any share of *Piṇḍa*; it adds that the man himself is ‘*Sapiṇḍa*’ of his
own six ancestors;—in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 52), which explains that the
‘Sapiṇḍā’ relationship ceases in one’s *seventh* ancestor, and
‘*Samānodaka*’ relationship extends upto that person who is known to be
descended from ‘my such and such ancestor,’ and from the point where no
such descent can be specifically pointed out, that relationship ceases
and beyond that all are ‘*gotraja*’ only;—in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla,
p. 256), which reproduces Medhātithi’s remark quoted above;—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 181);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
209b).


