+++
title = "072 स्त्रीणाम् असंस्कृतानाम्"

+++
(Verse 72 of other commentators.)

‘*Yathoktena kalpena*’—‘According to the rule declared in verse 67’
(Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Nandana);—‘just like the husband’s
relatives, *i.e*., after three days’ (Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 907), which supplies the
following explanation:—In the case of ‘*asaṃskṛta*’—*i.e*.,
unmarried—women, the ‘*bāndhavas*’—*i.e*., their relations on the
husband’s side—become pure in three days; but their *sanābhayaḥ*—*i.e*.,
relations on the father’s side—become pure according to the aforesaid
rule. It is because the relations on the father’s side are separately
mentioned by means of the word ‘*sanābhayaḥ*’ that the generic term
‘*bāndhavāḥ*’ is taken in the special sense of ‘relations on the
husband’s side’. But there can be no such relations in the case of
*unmarried* women; hence the women meant here must be those that have
been verbally betrothed, but not yet formally married.—‘*Sanābhayaḥ*,’
the relations on the father’s side, are purified according to the rule
that has been laid down in connection with the death of a boy before
*Upanayana*,—*i.e*., the impurity ceases after three days. The analogy
between the two cases is based upon the principle that for women
‘marriage’ takes the place of the *Upanayana*; so that the *unmarried
girl* stands on the same footing as the *uninitiated boy*.

The verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.24), to the effect that in the
case of girls who have been betrothed, but not married, the relations on
the father’s side are purified in three days. Here also ‘*bāndhava*’ and
‘*sanābhi*’ are explained as in *Aparārka*; and it is added that the
‘ten-days’ rule could not be rightly applied before marriage.’

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 608), in the same sense,
and ‘*bāndhavāḥ*’ is explained as *patisapiṇḍāḥ*, and ‘*sanābhayaḥ*’ as
‘*pitṛsapiṇḍāḥ*’,—and *yathoktena kalpena* as the ‘three days’ rule’.

It is also quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 264) in the sense that in the
case of girls that have been betrothed, but whose marriage-rites have
not been. performed, the *sapiṇḍas* of her husband are purified in three
days, while the *sapiṇḍas* of her father are purified by the said rule,
*i.e*., by the rule declared in the first half of the verse. It adds
that ‘betrothal’ must be a necessary condition, as before that the
unmarried girl win have no relations ‘on the husband’s side’; and that
her father’s *sapiṇḍas* to only three degrees are meant, because of the
express declaration of Vaśiṣṭha that ‘for unmarried girls the
*sapiṇḍa-relationship* extends to only three degrees.’

This is quoted in *Hāralatā* (p. 49), whieh adds the following
notes:—‘*Asaṃskṛtānām*,’ unmarried,—‘*bāndhavāḥ*’ relations on the
husband’s side—‘*yathoktena*,’ as described in the first line of the
verse, *i.e*., they are purified in three days;—the first half refers to
the girl dying after betrothal, as before betrothal, the girl can have
no ‘relations on the husband’s side’; her ‘*sanābhayaḥ*,’ *i.e*.,
relations on her father’s side, also become pure in three days.


