+++
title = "081 श्रोत्रिये तूपसम्पन्ने"

+++
(Verse 81 of others.)

‘*Upasampanne*’—(a) ‘who lives with one out of friendship or on
business’ or (b) ‘endowed with good character’ (Medhātithi);—(c)
‘neighbour’ (Nārāyaṇa);—(d) ‘dead’ (suggested but rejected by
Medhātithi).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.24), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Upasampanna*’ means either ‘related by friendship or
neighbourliness’ or ‘possessed of good character’;—the ‘*mātula*’
includes the maternal cousin and other relations of that kind, and the
‘*bāndhava*’ stands for one’s own ‘*bāndhava*’ as also those of his
father and mother;—in *Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 129), which explains
‘*npasampanna*’ as ‘living in one’s own house’, *i.e*., if a Vedic
scholar living in one’s house happens to die etc.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 610), which explains
‘*Śrotriya*’ as standing for one who has learnt the same rescensional
text as the person himself,—‘*Upasampanna*’ as one who is endowed with
friendliness or neighbourliness;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 431), as laying
down the rule relating to the case of the highly qualified *Śrotriya*,
or such near relations as the maternal uncle and the like; it explains
‘*upasampanna*’ as one endowed with friendliness or with good
qualities;—and in *Hāralatā* (p. 76), which adds the explanation:—‘on
the death of a Vedic Scholar belonging to another family in one’s own
house,—or on that of a Vedic Scholar who is *a near* *neighbour*
(‘*upasampanna*’) etc.’—and in the case of the mother’s uterine brother,
if the death takes place in another place, the impurity lasts for two
days and one night,—‘*Śiṣya*’, one who, though initiated by some one
else, has learnt, from one a portion of the Veda, or the subsidiary
sciences—in this case also the impurity lasts for two days and one
night,—‘*ṛtvik*’ one who has officiated at one’s sacrifices,—‘bāndhava’,
blood relation.


