+++
title = "082 प्रेते राजनि"

+++
(Verse 82 of others.)

‘*Anūcāne tathā gurau*’—‘A *guru* who expounds the Veda along with the
subsidiary sciences’ (Govindarājā, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘the *guru
and* the person capable of expounding the Veda’ (Nārāyaṇa);—Medhātithi
construes ‘*anūcāne*’ with ‘*aśrotriye*’, and explains it to mean ‘one
who, though not learned in the Veda, is yet conversant with the
subsidiary sciences’;—Nandana (and also ‘others’ in Medhātithi) read
‘*agurau*’, and explains ‘*anūcāne agurau*’ ‘one who is learned in the
Vedas and its subsidiaries, but is not one’s *guru*’.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 215), which explains ‘*Sajyotiḥ*’
as that *impurity* which lasts ‘as long as the light’, of the sun, or of
the stars;—in *Mitākṣarā*, which also explains the meaning to be that
the impurity lasts as long as the light; *i*. *e*., if death has
occurred during the day, then it lasts till sunset, while if it has
occurred during the night, then as long as the stars are visible;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 613), which offers the same explanation,
and in the same words, as Mitākṣarā;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 435), which
explains the term ‘*Sajyotiḥ*’ as ‘lasting as long as the light’, and
adds—‘during the day, it lasts till sunset, and during the night, till
sunrise’;—and in *Hāralatā* (p. 76), which adds the following
explanation:—That Kṣatriya king in whose territories one lives, if such
a king, who is not a Vedic Scholar, dies, then the impurity is
‘*Sajyotiṣ*’, *i*.*e*., if the death occurs during the day, it lasts as
long as the sun is visible, and if it occurs during the night, then as
long as the stars are visible,—if the said king is an expounder of the
Veda, the impurity lasts the whole day and night,—‘anūcāna’ is one who
has studied the Veda and is capable of expounding it,—similarly if the
‘*guru*’ dies, the impurity lasts the whole day and night, ‘*guru*’ is
one who has taught a little of the subsidiary sciences.


