+++
title = "084 न वर्धयेद्"

+++
(Verse 84 of others.)

‘*Pratyūhenṅāgniṣu kriyāḥ*’—Medhātithi has been misrepresented here, not
only by Buhler, but by Kullūka also. There is nothing in Medhātithi to
show that *Sandhyopāsana* should be omitted for ten days. Nor is there
any difference in the interpretation of Medhātithi and that of Kullūka
and others. (See *Translation*.)

‘*Sanābhayaḥ*’—‘*Sapiṇḍa*’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda);—‘*Sahodara*’, ‘uterine brother’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 891), which adds the following
notes:—With a view to remaining idle, without having to perform his
religious duties, one should not prolong the days of impurity; nor
should he abandon those necessary acts that are prescribed to be
performed in the *śrauta* fires,—*e.g*., the Agnihotra offerings; the
meaning is that all those should be done even during the days of
impurity;—the second half is added in anticipation of the objection that
“in view of the rule whereby *impure* men are not entitled to the
performance of religious acts, it would be right to abandon the acts
during the period of impurity.” What is meant is that it is quite true
that the *impure* m an should not perform religious acts; but on the
strength of the special texts (like the present one) hearing upon
certain Well defined acts, one would be justified in concluding that he
is *not* ‘impure’, so far as the performance of these acts is
concerned.—The use of *Atmanepada* form ‘*kurvāṇaḥ*’ makes it clear that
the actual *performer* of the religions acts is *not impure*—even though
the person dead or born be a very near relation of his,—in fact he is
quite pure. Inasmuch as this absence of impurity refers to the
*performer* himself, it follows that so far as officiating at the
performance of other persons is concerned, the near relations of the
dead or the born must be regarded as *impure* and unqualified.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.17), in support of the view that there
is no impurity regarding the performance of those religious acts that
are compulsory, the voluntary ones, however, which are done for the
purpose of gaining reward, should not be performed during impurity;—and
it adds that since the text specifically mentions the acts done ‘in the
fires’, it follows that the ‘five great sacrifices,’ which are not done
in *fire*, should cease during impurity.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 254) as affording justification
for the coalescing of ‘impurities’ due to more than one cause;—in
*Hāralatā* (pp. 7 and 25), which notes that the expression ‘*tat karma*’
implies that the impurity means incapacity to perform such acts as
Fire-kindling, gifts, Homa and so forth, and adds the following
notes:—‘*aghāhāni*’, days of impurity, those should not be prolonged by
the Agnihotrin, for whom its curtailment is justified by distinct texts;
and he should never observe the full period of ten days,—even dining the
curtailed period, he should not entirely stop the offerings into the
Fires, he should have this done through Brāhmaṇas belonging to other
*gotras* and hence not suffering from the same disabilities,—and the
reason for this lies in the fact that in the performance of the said
acts of disablity does not attach even to the *Sapiṇḍa*,—what to say of
persons of other *gotras*?

It is quoted also in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 278), which explains
‘*sanābhayaḥ*’ as *Sapiṇḍa*,—‘*tatkarma*’ as *officiating as a
priest*,—the disability due to impurity does hot attach to him, if no
person of other *gotras* is available for the work,—such is the
implication of the particle ‘*api*’.


