+++
title = "085 दिवाकीर्तिम् उदक्याम्"

+++
(Verse 85 of others.)

‘*Tatspṛṣṭinam*’—‘One who has touched these, *i.e*., the *Divākīrti* and
the rest’ (Medhātithi, Nārāyaṇa and Nandana); ‘one who has touched a
corpse’ (‘others’ in Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is.quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 921), which adds the
following:—Even though through its proximity to the term ‘*śava*’,
‘*tatspṛṣṭinam*’ would appear to mean ‘one who has touched a *śava*’,
yet inasmuch as the ‘*Divākīrti*’ and others mentioned before also
belong, like the corpse, to the category of ‘unclean things’, it is only
right that one who touches the person that has touched *all those*
should bathe. This agrees with Medhātithi.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3. 30) to the effect that even when
between the man and an unclean thing, there interposes a *living thing*
(like the man who has touched the unclean things) the man has to bathe.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 258) to the effect that the man who
touches one who has touched the *Divākīrti* and the rest, should bathe;
*i.e*., the touch of an unclean thing defiles also when it is indirect,
being interposed by a living object (like the man touching the Divākīrti
&c.).

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 202), which explains
*Divākīrti* as ‘Chaṇḍāla’;—and in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 54), which
reproduces the note made by *Madanapārijāta* is quoted in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 257), which explains ‘*divākīrti*’ as
‘Chaṇḍāla’;—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 796);—in *Śuddhikaumudī*. (p.
327), which explains ‘*divākīrti*’ as ‘chaṇḍāla’;—in *Ācāramayūkha* (p.
42);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (pp. 159 and 468), which explains
‘*tatspṛṣṭin*’ as ‘one who has touched a dead body’.


