+++
title = "088 आदिष्टी नोदकम्"

+++
(Verse 88 of others).

This rule does not apply to the case of the mother (Medhātithi),—father
and mother (Govindarāja),—father, mother and ācārya (Kulluka).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 876), which adds the following
notes:—‘*ādiṣṭī*’ is the ‘Religious Student,’—‘*āvratasya samāpanāt*’
means ‘till the *Samāvartana* ceremony has been performed’;—in
*Mitākṣarā* (on 3.5) which adds that the Religious Student is called
‘*ādiṣṭī*’ by reason of his receiving such *ādiṣṭa, ādeśa*, injunction,
as ‘Thou art a Religious Student, drink water, do your duty’ and so
forth;—that this refers to the death of persons other than the Father
and others.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta*, (p. 405) as pertaining to cases other
than the death of the ‘mother and others—it explains ‘*ādiṣṭī*’ as
‘Religious Student,’ but adds that some people explain the term as ‘one
who is undergoing expiatory penance.’ The second half means that on the
expiration of the ‘*vrata*,’ he shall make the water-offering and remain
impure for three days.

It is quoted in *Nirṇayansindhu* (pp. 195 and 392) to the effect that
after the *Samāvartana* ceremony has been performed, the Religious
Student shall observe an ‘impurity’ for three days, for the death of
persons that may have occurred during his studentship;—in
*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 313), which explains ‘*ādiṣṭī*’ as the
Religious Student;—in *Hāralatā* (p. 201), which has the following
note:—‘*ādiṣṭa*’ stands for the observances prescribed in connection
with Vedic study, and ‘*ādiṣṭī*’ stands for the Religious Student, as
also for other persons that may be keeping certain observances; so long
as the course of the observance has not been finished, the man should
not offer

the death-oblations even to his Preceptor;—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā*, (p.
295), which says that *Mitākṣarā* has explained ‘*ādiṣṭī*’ as the
Religious Student;—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 216).


