+++
title = "099 विप्रः शुध्यत्य्"

+++
(Verse 99 of others.)

‘*Apaḥ spṛṣṭvā*’.—‘Having touched water; *i.e*., having bathed’
(Medhātithi, Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa);—‘washed hands’ (Govindarāja).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.29), which adds the following
explanation:—‘*Kṛtakriyaḥ*’ should be construed with each of the four
terms, ‘*vipraḥ*’, ‘*kṣattriyaḥ*’, ‘*vaiśyaḥ*’ and ‘*śūdraḥ*’; the
meaning being—‘the Brāhmaṇa, having passed through the period of
impurity, having performed the rites, and having bathed, becomes pure by
touching water with his hands;’ the term ‘*spṛṣṭvā*’ is to be taken in
its literal sense of *touching*, and not in that of either *bathing* or
*sipping water*; as it is only the former that would be compatible with
the ‘conveyance and weapons’;—it suggests also another
explanation:—‘*kṛtakriyaḥ*’, ‘after having duly made the offerings of
water and other things during the period of impurity, the Brāhmaṇa
becomes pure by touching water, this being a substitute for the bathing
which is ordained for ending all forms of impurity; and the *kṣatriya*
becomes pure by touching the conveyance and weapons and so forth.’

This verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 427);—in *Smṛtitattva* (p.
278), which says that “according to *Mitākṣarā*, ‘*kṛtakriyaḥ*’ means
‘having bathed at the end of the period of impurity’”—also in II, p. 337
where it refers to the same opinion of *Mitākṣarā* and quotes *Hāralatā*
as explaining the term to mean ‘having performed the rites of the tenth
day;’—in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 154), which explains ‘*kṛtakriyaḥ*’ as ‘who
has finished the rites of the tenth day’;—in *Hāralatā* (p. 194) which
explains ‘*kṛtakriyaḥ*’ as ‘who has completed the rites of the tenth
day’, and ‘*apaḥ spṛṣṭvā*’ as standing for the mere *touching of water*,
and not for *bathing*, ‘*pratoda*’ as ‘what is known as *pāñcnī*,
‘*raśmi*’ as the yoking-rope and ‘*yaṣṭi*’ as the ‘bamboo stick and so
forth’;—and in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 226), which explains ‘*kṛtakriyaḥ*’
as one ‘who has performed’ the bath and other ceremonies at the end of
the period of impurity.
