+++
title = "101 असपिण्डन् द्विजम्"

+++
(Verse 101 of others.)

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.14), which deduces the
following conclusions from this and the next verse:—If, through
affection for the dead, one after having carried the dead body, lives in
the house and takes his food there, then he remains impure for ten
days;—if he remains in the house but takes no food there, the impurity
lasts for three days;—if he only carries the body, but neither remains
in the house nor takes food here, then the impurity lasts for one day
only;—in *Śuddhimayūkha* (p.17);—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 220);—in
*Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 59), which explains ‘*bandhuvat*’ as ‘through
affection and adds that if it is done merely as a meritorious act, then
there is mere bathing.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 413), which notes that the rule
pertains to the carrying of the dead body of a person belonging to the
same caste as oneself;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 631), which
deduces the same conclusions as *Mitākṣarā*, and adds that it refers to
the dead of the Brāhmaṇa’s own caste; for those of different castes, the
rule is laid down by Gautama, that the impurity is to be regulated
according to the rules pertaining to that caste;—and in *Smṛtitattva*
(II, p. 293), which explains ‘*bandhuvat*’ to mean ‘through affection’,
and deduces the same conclusions as *Mitākṣarā*, and adds that in the
case of ‘relations’ if one carries the dead body only with a view to
acquiring spiritual merit, the man remains impure for *three days*, even
though he may not live in the house or take his food there.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 883), which adds that from the rest of
the verse it is clear that what is said here applies only to that case
where one does not take his food in the house of the dead;—in *Hāralatā*
(p. 82), which has the following notes:—‘*nirhṛtya*,’ ‘having carried
and burnt,’—‘*bandhuvat*,’ through affectionate regard;—this implies
that if it is done by way of helping a helpless person, then this rule
is not applicable,—‘*māturāptān*,’ uterine brother or sister or maternal
uncle and so forth;—and in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 320) which adds
that this rule applies to ages other than the Kali.


