+++
title = "125 पक्षि-जग्धङ् गवा"

+++
(Verse 125 of others.)

‘*Avodhūtam*’—‘blown upon with the mouth, or blown upon with a piece of
cloth’ (Medhātithi);—‘dusted with cloth’ (Govindarāja);—‘moved by the
wind from a cloth, the foot or the like’ (Nārāyaṇa);—‘defiled by the
dust of a broom or of the air moved by the wings of a bird’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 105), which
explains ‘*avadhūtam*’ as ‘touched by the dust raised by the shaking of
a cloth’,—‘*avakṣutam*’ as ‘touched by drops of saliva dropped in
sneezing’;—it adds that if the food has contained hair or insects during
cooking, then it must be thrown away.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 458), which adds that the ‘bird’
here meant is one that is among the *eatable* ones; it explains
‘*avadhūtam*’ as ‘that over which cloth has been shaken’ or ‘that which
has been repeatedly picked up and thrown down by birds’,—‘*avakṣutam*’,
that ‘over which some one has sneezed’;—‘*mṛḍ*’, ‘mud’, includes ‘ash’
and ‘water’ also. It also adds that if the food has been cooked along
with hair or an insect, it has to be thrown away; it has to be purified
by clay, ash or water only if the hair or insect has fallen into it
after it has been cooked.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 827);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Śrāddha, p. 15b);—in *Śudhikaumudī* (p. 314), which says that
‘*pakṣijagdham*’ means, according to Kullūka, ‘eaten by an edible
bird’,—‘*avadhūtam*’ means ‘breathed upon’, and ‘*avakṣutam*’as ‘sneezed
upon’;—in *Śuddhimayūkha* (p. 2), which explains ‘*avodhūtam*’ as ‘over
which cloth has been dusted’;—and in *Smrtisāroddhāra* (p. 244) which
gives the same explanation of ‘*avodhūtam*’ and says that
‘*mṛtkṣepaṇam*’ includes *water-sprinkling* also.


