+++
title = "140 शूद्राणाम् मासिकम्"

+++
(Verse 140 of others.)

‘*Māsikam mpanam kāryam*’ means, according to Nandana, ‘shall offer the
monthly *Śrāddha*.’

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 906), which adds the following
notes:—The rule of purity pertaining to the Vaiśya means a period of
impurity extending over *fifteen* days;—‘*Nyāyavartinām*’ means devoted
to the service of the twice-born, the offering of the Five Great
Sacrifices, the supporting of dependents, the loving of wife and so
forth.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 111);—in *Vidhānapārijāta* (II, p.
318), which leads ‘*ārya*’ (for ‘Vaiśya’) and explains it as
*Vaiśya*;—in *Hāralatā* (p. 10), which has the following notes:—That
‘Śūdra’ is called *Nyāyavartin* who, with a purely religious motive,
serves the Brāhmaṇa honestly and earnestly, performs the Five Sacrifices
with ‘*namaḥ*’ as the mantra, avoids all forbidden food and forbidden
acts,—such a *Śūdra* becomes purified in *Fifteen* days, in the manner
of a Vaiśya,—he should *shave* every month,—or *vapanam* may mean
‘offering of Piṇḍas’ *i.e*., the Śrāddha on the Moonless Day,—it is only
such a Śūdra that is entitled to eat the food-leavings of the
Brāhmaṇa,—this curtailment of the period of impurity (from one month to
fifteen days) is only for the purpose of the man serving the Brāhmaṇa,
and for that of offering the Five Sacrifices and so forth,—in
*Varṣakriyākaumudī* (p. 573), which explains *vapanam* as shaving and
says that the Śūdra should not keep long hair,—or it may stand for the
*Amāvasyā Śrāddha*;—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 352).


