+++
title = "031 प्रतिकूलं वर्तमाना"

+++
“Kullūka thinks that the terms *vāhya* and *hīna* may either refer (*a*)
to two sets of men or (*b*) to one only; (*a*) under the former
supposition, the *Vāhyas* must be understood to be the *Pratiloma*
offering of a *śūdra*, *i.e*., *Āyogavas*, *Kṣattṛs* and *Caṇḍālas*,—and
the *Hīnas* the *Pratiloma* offspring of *Kṣatriyas* and *Vaiśyas*
*i.e*., Sūtas, Māgadhas and Vaidehas. Each of these two sets produce
fifteen lower races by union with women of the four chief castes and of
their own (verse 27):—(*b*) But if the two terms *vāhya* and *hīna* are
referred to one set of males only, they must be understood to denote the
six *Pratilomas*, *Caṇḍālas*, *Kṣattṛs*, *Āyogavas*, *Vaidehas*,
*Māgadhas* and *Sūtas*; and it must be assumed that the verse refers to
unions between these six *Pratiloma* races alone. Then the lowest among
them, the *Caṇḍāla* may produce, with females of the five higher
*Pratiloma* tribes, five more degraded races; the *Kṣattṛ* with the four
above him, four; the *Āyogava* with the three above him; the Vaideha,
‘two, and the *Māgadha one*. The total of 5+4+3+2+1 is thus
15.—Rāghavānanda agrees with this interpretation.—Nārāyaṇa, on the other
hand, refers the terms *vāhya* and *hīna* to one set of males, the three
*Pritilamas* springing from the *Śūdra*; and assumes that the verse
refers to unions of these three with females of the four principal
castes and of their own.”—Buhler.


