+++
title = "003 पिता रक्षति"

+++
*Mahābhārata* (13.46.14).—(Same as Manu.)

*Baudhāyana* (2-3.45).—‘They quote the following:—“Their father protects
them in childhood, their husband protects them in youth, and their sons
protect them in old age; a woman is never lit for independence.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (5.3).—‘They quote the following:—“Their fathers protect them
in childhood; their husbands protect them in youth; and their sons
protect them in old age; a woman is never fit for independence.”’

*Viṣṇu* (25.13).—‘To remain subject, in her infancy to her father, in
her youth, to her husband, and in her old age to her sons.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.85-86).—‘The father shall guard her while she is a
maiden, her husband, when she has been married, and her son in old age;
in the absence of these, her relations; there is no independence for the
woman at any time. When deprived of her husband, she shall never live
apart from her father, mother, son, brother, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, or maternal uncle.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Aparārka, p. 109).—‘When there is no one left in the two
families (of her father and of her husband), the King becomes the master
and supporter of the woman; he shall support her and punish her if she
deviates from the path of duty.’

*Nārada* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 410).—‘Women, even though born of noble
families, become ruined by independence; that is why Prajāpati has
ordained that they shall not be independent.’

*Nārada* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 111).—‘On the death of her husband, if the
widow is without a son, the members of her husband’s family shall be her
masters; they shall take it upon themselves to protect and support her.
If the husband's family has perished, and not a single member of it is
left, her father’s family shall be her master. When there is no one left
in either of the two families, the King becomes her lord and protector;
it is for him to protect her and punish her if she deviates from the
right path.’
