+++
title = "004 काले ऽदाता"

+++
*Gautama* (18.22).—‘He who neglects the marriage of girls commits sin.’

*Baudhāyana* (4.1.12, 17-19).—‘He who does not give away a marriageable
daughter within three years of her puberty doubtlessly contracts a guilt
equal to that of killing an embryo. He who does not approach, during
three years, a wife who is marriageable, incurs, without doubt, a guilt
equal to that of killing an embryo; but if a man does not approach his
wife after she has bathed after her temporary uncleanliness, though he
dwells near her,—his ancestors lie, during that month, in the menstrual
excretions of the wife. They declare that the guilt of the husband who
does not approach his wife in due season,—of him who approaches her
during her temporary uncleanliness,—and of him who commits an unnatural
crime, is equally heinous.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.69-70).—‘They quote the following:—“If through the
father’s negligence, a maiden is given away after the suitable age has
passed, she, who was waiting for a husband, destroys him who gives her
away............ Out of fear of the appearance of menses, let the father
marry his daughter while she still goes about naked; for if she stays in
the house after the age of puberty, sin falls upon the father.”’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.64).—‘If one does not give away the girl, he incurs the
guilt of killing an embryo, at each of her menstrual periods.’

*Kāśyapa* (Aparārka, p. 93).—‘If a girl perceives her menstrual blood
while she is still in her father’s house, unmarried, her father becomes
*the killer of an embryo*, and the girl herself a *cāṇḍālī*. If any
Brāhmaṇa, through folly, marries such a girl, he is to be known as *the
husband of a*

*Vṛṣali*, unfit to be invited at a Śrāddha and to dine with Brāhmaṇas.’

*Nārada* (Do.).—‘The girl shall not ignore the appearance of her
menstrual flow; she shall inform her relations of it; if after this,
they do not give her away, they become equal to Brāhmaṇa-killers.’

*Saṃvarta* (Do.).—‘Father, mother, and brother, all these three go to
hell, if they see a maiden in puberty.’

*Bṛhaspati* (24.3, Vivādaratnākara, p. 412).—‘If the father does not
give her away in time,—or if the husband does not approach her during
her periods,—or if the son does not supply his mother with food,—all
these three become legally reprehensible and deserving of punishment.’
