+++
title = "013 पानन् दुर्जनसंसर्गः"

+++
*Śukranīti* (3.30-5.3).—‘Living with other men, speaking with them even
in public and freedom even for a moment, should not be granted to women,
by their husband, father, King, son, father-in-law and other relatives;
nor time for anything besides domestic duties.’

Do. (4.4.40-42).—‘The good wife should give up words that indicate
senselessness, lunacy, anger, or envy; also the contemptible vices of
meanness, jealousy, excessive attachment to worldly things, vanity and
boastfulness, ungodliness, adventurousness and thieving.’

*Bṛhaspati* (24.5, 7).—‘Let not a woman reside in another man’s house
separated from her father, husband or sons; by giving way to malicious
propensities, she is sure to lose her reputation. Drinking wine, roaming
about, sleeping during the day, and neglect of daily duties are the
faults disgracing a woman.’

*Viṣṇu* (25.3, 9, 10-12).—‘To show reverence to her mother-in-law,
father-in-law, elders, divinities and to guests; not to decorate herself
with ornaments while her husband is absent from home; not to resort to
the houses of others; not to stand at the door or at windows; not to act
by herself in any matter.’

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 108).—‘Without permission, she should not go out
of the house; nor without an upper garment; she should not walk very
fast; nor converse with men, except with traders, renunciates, the aged
and physicians; she should not expose her navel; she should wear clothes
hanging down to the ankles; should never uncover her breasts; should
never laugh without covering her face; should never bear ill-will
towards her husband or his relations; should never sit with a prostitute
or other such bad women; as one’s character becomes besmirched by
associating with bad characters.’

*Vyāsa* (Do., p. 108).—‘Sitting at the door, peeping out of the window,
improper conversation and laughing go to disgrace women of noble
families.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 432).—‘She should avoid looking at and
conversing with other men and associating with wicked ascetics and
others; should never go to the house of strangers, to the public road or
road-crossings or lanes, or to the abode of ascetics; should avoid
standing on the path to the wells and roaming in the morning and in the
evening; she should never think of using the bed, seat, clothes and
ornaments belonging to others, until they have been cleansed and
repaired, etc., etc., etc.’
