+++
title = "031 पुत्रम् प्रत्युदितम्"

+++
**(verses 9.31-44)**

(See also under 48-56.)

*Gautama* (18.9-14).—‘The child belongs to one who begets it except when
an agreement to the contrary has been made. The child begotten on his
wife at a living husband’s request belongs to the husband; but if
begotten by a stranger, it belongs to the latter;—or to both;—but if
reared by the husband, it belongs to him.’

*Āpastamba* (2.13.6-7).—‘A Brāhmaṇa-text says that the son belongs to
the begetter. They quote also the following verse from the Veda:—“Having
considered myself formerly as a father, I shall not now allow any longer
my wives to be approached by other men, since they have declared that a
son belongs to the begetter in the world of Yama. The giver of the seed
carries off the son after death, in Yama’s world. Therefore they guard
their wives, fearing the seed of strangers. Carefully watch over the
procreation of your children, lest stranger-seed he sown on your soil.
In the next world, the son belongs to the begetter; an imprudent husband
makes the begetting of children futile for himself.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.6-9).—‘There is a difference of opinion. Some say the son
belongs to the husband of the mother, and others say he belongs to the
begetter. With respect to this they quote verses on both sides, like the
following:—“If one man’s bull were to beget a hundred calves on another
man’s cows, they would belong to the owner of the cows; in vain would
the bull have spent his strength.” “Carefully watch the procreation of
your offspring, lest strangers sow seed on your soil; in the next world,
the son belongs to the begetter; by carelessness, a husband makes his
offspring futile for himself.”’

Do. (17.63-64).—‘They declare that a son begotten on a widow who has not
been duly authorised, belongs to the begetter; if she was duly
authorised, then the child belongs to both the males connected with the
authorisation.’

See Manu 10.72.

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 414).—‘The origin or soil is the
most potent factor; that is why castes become intermixed.’

Do. (p. 581).—‘The declaration of the Veda is that the child belongs to
the owner of the soil; some sages say that the child belongs to the
mother; the child is said to belong to two fathers.’
