+++
title = "059 देवराद् वा"

+++
(See below, verse 64 *et seq*.)

*Gautama* (18.4-7).—‘A woman whose husband is dead and who desires
offspring may bear a son to her brother-in-iaw. She should obtain the
permission of her elders and should have intercourse during her period
only. On failure of her brother-in-law, she may obtain offspring from a
*Sapiṇḍa*, a *Sayotra*, a *Samānapravara* or from one belonging to the
same caste. Some people hold that she should do this with none hut her
brother-in-law.’

Do. (28.22-23).—‘The widow may seek to raise up offspring to her
deceased husband. A son begotten on a widow, whose brother-in-law is
alive, by another relative, is excluded from inheritance.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.4.9-10).—‘After the expiry of six months from her
husband’s death, she may, with the authority of her elders, bear a son
to her brother-in-law, in case she has no son. They quote the
following:—“A barren woman or one who has already borne sons, or one who
is past childhearing, or one whose children are all dead, or one who is
unwilling, must never be authorised or appointed to do this.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.56).—‘After the completion of six months from the death
of her husband, she shall bathe, and offer a funeral oblation to the
husband. Then her father and brother shall assemble the elders who
taught or sacrificed for her husband, as also his relatives, and
authorise her to raise issue to her deceased husband. One should not
thus appoint a widow who is either mad or ill-behaved or diseased; nor
one who is very aged;—sixteen years after maturity is the period for
authorising a widow. Nor shall such an authorisation be made if the male
entitled to approach her is sickly.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.68-69).—‘If a widow is without a son, her
brother-in-law, or a *Sapiṇḍa* or a *Sagotra*,—smeared with butter,
shall approach her during her period, being authorised to do so by the
elders, for the purpose of obtaining a son for her. He shall approach
her only till conception has taken place; doing otherwise, he would
become an outcast. The son born in this manner is called *Kṣetraja*.’

*Bṛhaspati* (25.12-14).—‘The *Niyoga* (authorisation of a widow to raise
offspring to her deceased husband), after having been declared by Manu,
has been forbidden by himself; on account of the deterioration in the
nature of the time-cycles, this cannot he done by all in the proper
form. In the *Kṛta*, *Tretā* and *Dvāpara* cycles, men were imbued with
austerities and with knowledge; in the *Kali* cycle a deterioration in
the capacity of men has been brought about. Therefore the sons that were
obtained by various methods by the ancient sages cannot he obtained by
men now, on account of their being without that capacity.’

*Nārada* (12.80-81).—‘Should the husband of a childless woman die, she
should go to her brother-in-law, through desire to obtain a son, after
having received the necessary authorisation from her elders;—and he
shall have intercourse with her till a son is born. When a son is born,
he must leave her. It would be sinful intercourse otherwise.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 97).—‘On the death of her husband, or on
her having abandoned her husband, a woman may beget a son from a man of
her own caste. If she is a child-widow, or has been forcibly abandoned
by her husband, she shall go through the sacrament of marriage again,
with any other man. But this remarriage of women, or the begetting of a
son from the brother-in-law, or the freedom of women, should not be
permitted during the *Kali* age; as during this age, men are inclined to
be sinful.’

*Āpastamba* (2.27.2-4).—‘A husband shall not make over his wife, who
occupies the position of a *gentilis*, to others (than to his
*gentiles*), in order to cause children to be begotten for himself. For
they declare that a bride is given to the family of her husband (and not
to the husband alone). This is forbidden for the present age, on account
of the incapacity of men’s senses.’

*Yama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 446).—‘A man desirous of securing offspring
for bis dead brother, may beget a child on his widow; he shall leave her
as soon as conception has taken place; he shall never approach her after
she has got a child.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., 449).—‘After having carried out *Niyoga*, one should
perform the prescribed penance for expiation.’
