+++
title = "060 विधवायान् नियुक्तस्"

+++
**(verses 9.60-68)  
**

[(See texts under
59.)](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc201419.html#explanatory-notes)

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.61, *et seq*.).—‘He shall approach the widow in the
moment sacred to Prajāpati, behaving like a husband, without dallying
with her, and without abusing or ill-treating her. She shall obtain the
expenses for food, raiment, baths and unguents from the estate of her
deceased husband. They declare that a son begotten on a widow not duly
authorised belongs to the begetter; if she has been duly authorised, the
child belongs to both the males connected with the authorisation. No
such authorisation shall be made for the purpose of obtaining a living.
But some people declare that an authorisation may be made through desire
for wealth, after an expiatory penance has been performed.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.68-69).—(See under 59.)

*Gautama* (18.8).—‘She shall not bear more than two sons.’

*Nārada* (12.82-88).—‘He shall approach the woman, free from passion,
and without amorous desire. He must have anointed his limbs with
clarified butter, or with oil which has not lost its natural condition,
and must turn away his face from hers and avoid the contact of limb with
limb. For this custom is practised only when the family threatens to
become extinct, for the continuance of the lineage, and not from amorous
desire. He must not approach a woman who is with child, or blameworthy,
or not duly authorised by her relations. Should a woman procreate a son
with her brother-in-law without having been authorised thereto by her
relations, that son is declared illegitimate and incapable of
inheriting, by the expounders of the Veda. So when a younger brother has
intercourse, without authorisation, with the wife of his elder
brother,—or an elder brother with the wife of his younger brother,—they
are both held to have committed incest. If he has been authorised by the
elders, he shall approach the woman and advise her in the manner
previously stated, as if she were his daughter-in-law. He becomes
purified of the sin when the son is born and his Birth-ceremonies have
been performed. He shall approach her only once,—or till conception has
taken place. When she has become pregnant, she is again even as a
daughter-in-law to him. Should the man or woman behave otherwise,
impelled by amorous desire, they shall be severely punished by the King.
Otherwise righteousness would be violated.’

*Yama* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 446).—‘When during her period, the woman has
taken her bath, her brother-in-law, desiring an offspring for his
deceased brother, may approach her during the dark night, with speech
held in check, with a single cloth on, and his body anointed with
clarified butter, and mind stricken with grief, avoiding the contact of
his face and limbs with her face and limbs.’
