+++
title = "076 प्रोषितो धर्मकार्यार्थम्"

+++
*Nārada* (12.98-101).—‘Eight years shall a Brāhmaṇa woman wait for the
return of her absent husband; or four years, if she has no issue; after
that she may betake herself to another man. A Kṣatriya woman shall wait
six years; or three years if she has no issue; a Vaiśya woman, for three
years if she has issue; otherwise, two years. No definite period is
prescribed for a Śūdra woman, whose husband has gone on a journey. Twice
the above periods is ordained for eases where the absent husband is
alive and tidings are received of him. The above rules have been laid
down for those cases where a man has disappeared. No offence is imputed
to a woman if she goes to live with another man after the fixed period
has elapsed.’

*Gautama* (18.15-17).—‘A wife must wait for six years, if her husband
has disappeared. If he is heard of, she shall go to him. But if the
husband has become a Renunciate, his wife must refrain from intercourse
with men. The wife of a Brāhmaṇa who has gone abroad for study must wait
for twelve years.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.75-80).—‘The wife of an emigrant shall wait for live
years. After five years have passed, she may go out to seek her husband.
If, for reasons connected with spiritual or pecuniary matters, she be
unwilling to leave her home, she must behave in the same manner as if
her husband were dead. In this manner a Brāhmaṇa woman with issue shall
wait five years, and one having no issue, four years; a Kṣatriya woman
with issue, five years, and one without issue, three years; a Vaiśya
woman with issue, five years, and one without issue, two years; a Śūdra
woman with issue, three years and one without issue, one year. After
that, she shall live among those who are united with her husband, in
interest, or by birth, or by the funeral cake, or by water-libations, or
by descent from the same family,—each earlier named person being more
venerable than the following one. But while any member of the family is
living, she shall never go to a stranger.’
