+++
title = "077 संवत्सरम् प्रतीक्षेत"

+++
**(verses 9.77-84)  
**

*Nārada* (12.92-95).—‘The woman who wastes the entire property of her
husband under the pretence that it is her own *strīdhana*, or who
procures abortion, or who makes an attempt on her husband’s life,—the
King shall banish her from the town. One who always shows malice to him,
or makes unkind speeches, or eats before her husband,—he shall expel
from his house. Let not a husband show love to a barren woman, or to one
who gives birth to female children only, or whoso conduct is
reprehensible, or who constantly contradicts him; if he does love
conjugal intercourse with her, he becomes liable to censure himself. If
a man forsakes a wife who is obedient, sweet-spoken, skilful, virtuous
and the mother of male issue,—the King shall make him mindful of his
duty by inflicting severe punishment.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.73).—‘One who drinks wine, or is diseased, or guileful,
or barren, or destructive of wealth, or harsh-tongued, or brings forth
only female children, or bears malice towards her man,—shall be
superseded.’

*Āpastamba* (Aparārka, p. 100).—‘So long as one’s wife is endowed with
virtue and offspring, one shall not take to another wife; if she be
wanting in either of the two, he shall take to another.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.4-516).—‘Let him abandon a barren wife in the tenth
year; one who bears daughters only, in the twelfth; one whose children
all die, in the fifteenth; but her who is quarelsome, without delay.’

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 425).—‘If she does not attend upon him, or is
barren or inimical to her husband,—such a wife the wise men always
abandon; as also one who talks hurriedly and harshly.’

*Viṣṇu* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 423).—‘He who forsakes a faultless wife
should be punished like a thief.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘There is no expiation for the man who forsakes his
wife, through folly and unjustly, and thereby abandons his duty and also
progeny; hut he may abandon her if she is leprous or outcast or barren,
or insane or with menstruation disorganised, or inimical towards
himself.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Do.).—‘One who is averse to sexual intercourse, or to
pilgrimage, or to the performance of her duties, or who has intercourse
with a disciple or an elder,—these four kinds of wife should he
abandoned; specially one who is prone to injure her husband.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘He shall avoid a wife who destroys her embryo, has
intercourse with lower castes, or with his disciples and sons, or is
addicted to vicious habits, or is in the habit of wasting money
and-grains.’

Do. (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 873).—‘The childless wife should be
abandoned in the ninth year; one who loses her children, in the tenth
year; one who gives birth to daughters only, during the eleventh year;
and one of harsh words, immediately.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 872),—‘One shall supersede
a wife who is habitually unpleasant or inimical towards men, or
disagreeable.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘If a wife gives birth to too many children, the husband
shall wait for eight years; if she is barren and otherwise defective,
ten years; if she gives birth to daughters only, for twelve years,—and
then, desirous of male issue, he shall take another wife in the lawful
manner.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava—Ācara, p. 508).—‘If the wife is one that
puts obstacles in the way of the performance of religious acts, or is
unchaste, or is very much diseased,—the husband shall abandon her, for
the; preservation of his righteousness;—if she is harsh of speech, he
shall not abandon her, but supersede her; nor shall he give up having
intercourse with her.’

*Dakṣa* (Aparārka, p. 113).—‘If the first wife, who is the
*wife-in-law*, becomes faulty, then alone he shall take another wife
with better qualities.’
