+++
title = "090 त्रीणि वर्षाण्य्"

+++
**(verses 9.90-92)  
**

*Mahābhārata* (13.44.15).—(Same as Manu, but reading ‘*svayam
bhartāramarjayet*’ for the last foot.)

*Baudhāyana* (4.10.14).—‘Three years let a marriageable damsel wait for
the order of her father. But after that time, let her choose for
herself, in the fourth year, a husband of the same caste. If no one of
equal rank is to be found, she may take even one destitute of good
qualities.’

*Gautama* (18-20).—‘A marriageable maiden who is not given in marriage
shall allow three monthly periods to pass, and afterwards unite herself,
of her own will, to a blameless man, giving up the ornaments received
from her father or his family.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.67-68).—‘A maiden who has attained puberty shall wait for
three years;—after three years, she may herself take a husband of equal
caste.’

*Viṣṇu* (24.40).—‘When she has allowed three monthly periods to pass
without being married, let her choose a husband for herself; three
monthly periods having passed, she has, in every case, full power to
dispose of herself as she thinks best.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.64).—‘If there are no persons to give her away, the
maiden shall herself take a suitable husband.’

*Nārada* (12.22-23).—‘If no such person be in existence as should marry
her, let the maiden approach the King, and let her, with his permission,
betake herself to a bridegroom of her own choice, who belongs to her own
caste, and is a suitable match in point of descent, morality, age and
sacred learning. Let her discharge her religious duties in common with
him, and bear children to him.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 773).—‘If, for twelve years, the girl
remains unmarried in her father’s house, the guilt of embryo-killing
falls upon the father, and the maiden shall choose her own husband.’
