+++
title = "104 ऊर्ध्वम् पितुश्"

+++
*Gautama* (28.1).—‘After the father’s death, the sons shall divide his
estate.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.3.3, 8).—‘A father may divide his property among his
sons;—while the father lives, the division of the estate can take place
only with his permission.’

*Viṣṇu* (18.36).—‘Sons who are of the same caste as the father shall
receive equal shares.’

*Āpastamba* (2.13.1-3).—‘Sons begotten in the right manner on a wife of
the same caste as oneself have a right to inherit the estate;—if they do
not sin against either of the parents.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.117).—‘After the parents, the sons shall divide equally
their property as well as their debts; the mother’s property, what
remains after the paying off of the debts, her daughters shall divide
among themselves; and in the absence of the daughters, the offspring of
their daughters.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 12).—‘Partition is ordained only among those
sons who have attained their majority;—for males, majority is attained
in the sixteenth year.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.591).—‘If the father he dead, the sons and the rest are
to receive their shares according to the said proportion (*i.e*., sons
and their mothers are to be made equal sharers).’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 31).—‘During the life-time of the parents, the sons
have no right over the ancestral property; after the death of the
parents, there is partition of the ancestral property, and also of the
self-acquired property of the father... There shall be an equal division
of the property and of the debt.’

*Nārada* (13.49-50).—‘After their father’s death, the sons shall succeed
to his wealth in order; whenever a superior son is wanting, the one next
to him shall succeed. On failure of a son, the daughter succeeds;
because she continues the lineage just like the son.’

Do. (13.2).—‘The father being dead, the sons shall divide the estate as
they ought,—so shall the daughters divide the property of the mother
when she dies; on failing daughters, their issue.’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, 718).—‘After the father, the sons shall divide the
property equally.’

*Bṛhaspati* (25.1).—‘After the death of both parents, division of the
property among brothers has been ordained to take place. It may take
place even in the father’s life-time, if the mother be past
child-hearing.’

Do. (25.10).—‘When they divide the father’s heritage, all the sons shall
share alike.’

*Devala* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 456).—‘On the father’s death the sons
shall divide among themselves the father’s property; they have no right
over the property so long as the father is alive and is free from
faults.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do.).—‘During the father’s life time, the sons shall
not divide the property; the sons have no right even over that which may
have been acquired subsequently; because as regards property, as well as
over religious rites, the sons are dependant upon the father, so long as
he is alive and is faultless.’

*Saṃgrahakāra* (Parāśaramādhava-Vyavahāra, p. 327).—‘The father’s
property may be divided on his death, even while the mother is living;
as apart from her husband, the wife has no proprietory right; similarly
the mother’s property may be divided on her death, even while the father
is living, as the husband has no right over his wife’s *Strīdhana* while
her children are there.’
