+++
title = "112 ज्येष्ठस्य विंश"

+++
**(verses 9.112-113)**

*Gautama* (28.5-8).—‘The additional share of the eldest son consists of
the twentieth part of the estate, a male and a female (of animals with
one row of front teeth), a cart yoked with animals with two rows of
front teeth, and a bull; the additional share of the middlemost consists
of the one-eyed, old, hornless and tailless animals, if there are
several of them; the additional share of the youngest consists of the
sheep, grain, iron-utensils in the house, a house, a cart yoked with
oxen, and one of each kind of the other animals. The remaining property
shall be divided equally.’

*Baudhāyana* (2-3.4-5).—‘Or the eldest may receive the most excellent
chattel; for the Veda says “they distinguished the eldest by an
additional share of the property;” or the eldest may receive in excess,
one part out of ten; and the other sons shall receive equal shares. The
additional share of the eldest is a cow, a horse, a goat or a sheep,
respectively among the four castes.’

*Viṣṇu* (18.37).—‘A best part shall be given to the eldest as his
additional share.’

*Yājñavalkya* (12.114).—‘If the father makes the partition, he can
distribute the property among his sons as he pleases; or he shall give
the superior share to the eldest; or he may give equal shares to all.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 33).—‘If the father makes the division during his
life-time, he shall not make any difference in favour of any son; nor
shall he disinherit any without reason.’

*Nārada* (13.4).—‘Or the father himself may distribute his property
among his sons, when he is stricken in years,—either allotting a larger
share to the eldest son, or in any other way that he chooses.’

Do. (13.13).—‘To the eldest son, a larger share shall be allotted and a
lesser share than that to the youngest, the rest shall take equal
shares; and so shall an unmarried sister.’

*Bṛhaspati* (25.7-10).—‘Partition among coparceners is held to be of two
kinds. One is with attention to priority of birth, the other consists of
the allotment of equal shares. All sons of the twice-born, begotten on
wives of the same caste as themselves, shall take equal shares, after
giving a preferential share to the eldest. He who is the first by birth,
by sacred knowledge, or by good qualities, shall take a couple of shares
out of the partible wealth, and the rest shall take equal shares; hut
the former stands to these latter in the relation of father, as it were.
When they divide their father’s heritage, the sons shall share alike;
but he who is distinguished by sacred knowledge and virtue shall obtain
a larger share than the rest.’

*Hārīta* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 471).—‘When the property is going to be
divided, they shall make over to the eldest a hull from among the cows
and hulls, or some superior article, and the household temple; the
others shall go out of the family-house and build their own houses. If
they do not build separate houses, then the best house shall go the
eldest, the next best to the middlemost, and the next to the youngest.’

*Āpastamba* (2.14.7, 10-15).—‘In some countries, gold, black cattle, or
black produce of the earth (iron) is the share of the eldest. This
preference for the eldest son is forbidden by the scriptures; for it is
declared in the Veda, without making any differentiation among sons,
that “Manu divided his wealth amongst his sons.” The Veda also lends
support to the rule in favour of the eldest son—“They distinguish the
eldest by a larger share of the heritage.” But the answer to this is
that those versed in the science of interpreting the law declare that a
mere statement of facts cannot he a rule.’

*Devala* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 472).—‘One should allot the tenth part of
the property as the additional share for the eldest who happens to be
well-behaved.’
