+++
title = "118 स्वेभ्यो ऽंशेभ्यस्"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (18.35).—‘Unmarried daughters shall receive shares proportionate
to the sons’ shares.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.124).—‘The brothers who have already had their
sacramental rites performed shall perform the sacraments for those
brothers and sisters whose sacraments have not been performed,—after
each of them has given to the sister the fourth part of their share.’

*Nārada* (13.13).—‘The rest shall take equal shares; and so shall an
unmarried sister.’

Do. (13.33-34).—‘Those brothers and sisters for whom the sacraments have
not been performed by their father, must have them performed by their
elder brothers, who shall defray the expenses from the paternal
property. Or, if no paternal property is left, the rites shall be
performed for those by the brothers previously initiated contributing
the required funds from their own portions.’

*Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 731).—‘Those sons and daughters that have not had
their sacraments performed by the father shall have them performed by
their elder brothers, who have already had their sacraments performed,
out of the paternal property.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 494).—‘For unmarried daughters, the
fourth part of the property has been ordained, the other three parts
being for the sons.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 495).—‘When the father's estate is being
divided, the unmarried daughter shall receive out of the estate,
provision for her ornaments, marriage and dowry.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 33).—‘Among the brothers, those that are not settled
in life shall receive the expenses of settling, and the unmarried
sisters, the expenses for their marriage,—from those brothers that are
already settled in life.’

*Brhaṣpati* (25.21).—‘Should thore be younger brothers whose initiation
has not been performed, they must be initiated by the other brothers;
the expenses being defrayed out of the property inherited from the
father.’
