+++
title = "127 अपुत्रो ऽनेन"

+++
**(verses 9.127-129, 9.132-133)  
**

(See below, verse 139.)

*Gautama* (23.18).—‘A father who has no male issue may *appoint* his
daughter, offering oblations to Agni and to Prajāpati, and addressing to
the bridegroom the words—“For me be thy male offering.” Some people hold
that the daughter becomes an *Appointed Daughter* by the mere intention
of her father.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.3-15).—‘The male child born of a daughter after an
agreement has been made, is to be known as *the son of an appointed
daughter*, and other male offspring to the daughter they call *the
daughter’s son*.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.15-17)—‘The third is the *Appointed Daughter*;—it is
declared in the Veda—“A maiden who has no brothers comes back to the
male ancestors (of her own family); returning she becomes their son.”
With reference to this matter, there is a verse to be spoken by the
father when appointing his daughter,—“I shall give thee a brotherless
damsel decked with ornaments; the son whom she may hear shall he my
son.’”

*Viṣṇu* (15.4-5).—‘The third is the son of an Appointed Daughter. She is
called an Appointed Daughter, who is given away by her father with the
words “the son whom she bears shall be mine.” She is called an Appointed
Daughter, though she has not been given away according to the rule of an
Appointed Daughter.’

*Bṛhaspati* (25.37-38).—‘Both a son’s son and the son of an Appointed
Daughter lead a man to heaven. Both are pronounced to he equal as
regards their right of inheritance and the duty of offering balls of
meal. Gautama has declared that a daughter is appointed after offering
oblations *to Agni* and Prajāpati; others have said that she is an
Appointed Daughter who was merely intended to ho one by a man having no
male issue.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 561).—‘Just as the daughter has rights
over her father’s property, even in the presence of the relatives, so is
her son also the owner of the property of his mother’s father.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 562).—‘A sonless man *appoints* his
daughter as his son,—either in his own mind, or in the presence of the
king, the fire, and his relatives;—or she may have been so appointed
even before her birth and given to her husband on that express
understanding;—or she may be so given away even after her father’s
death. Such an Appointed Daughter obtains an equal share in the property
of her father.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 559).—‘The Appointed Daughter is
like the son; her son offers Piṇḍa to his father’s father as also to his
mother’s father; there is no difference, in the world, between the
daughter’s son and the son’s son, so far as benefit is concerned.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 56, 2-128).—‘The son of the Appointed
Daughter is like the body-born son.’

*Devala* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 562, 2-128).—‘The son of the Appointed
Daughter is equal to the son; he inherits the property of his own
father, as also that of his mother’s father, who has no son, as if he
were his own son;—he shall offer the ball of meal to his own as well as
his mother’s father. Whether appointed or not appointed, whichever son
the daughter gives birth to, by that son, does her father also become
*endowed with son*; and he may offer the hall to him and inherit his
property.

(Devala also reproduces Manu 133.)

*Mahābhārata* (13.45-13).—(Same as Manu 132, second-half.)
