+++
title = "158 पुत्रान् द्वादश"

+++
**(verses 9.158-160)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (2.3.31-32).—‘They quote the following verses: “The
Body-born son, the son of an Appointed Daughter, the son begotten on a
wife through another man, the adopted son and the appointed son, the son
horn secretly,

and the son cast off are entitled to share the inheritance. The son of
an unmarried damsel, the son of a pregnant bride, the son bought, the
son of a re-married woman, the son self-given and the Niṣāda are only
members of the family.’

*Gautama* (28.32-33).—‘The Body-born son, the son begotten on a wife
through another man, the adopted son, the appointed son, the son born
secretly, and the son cast off are inheritors of property. The son of an
unmarried damsel, the son of a pregnant bride, the son of a re-married
womans the son of an Appointed Daughter, the son self-given, and the son
bought belong to the family;—these latter are entitled to one-fourth of
a share, in the absence of the former six sons.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.25-39).—‘They declare that, these six sons (Body-born,
begotten on the wife through another man. the Appointed Daughter, son of
a re-married woman, the son of an unmarried damsel, and the son secretly
born) are heirs as well as kinsmen, preservers from great danger. Among
those who are only kinsmen, not heirs are—one received with the pregnant
bride, the adopted son, the son bought, the son sell-given, the son cast
off, and the son of a Śūdra woman. They declare that the last-mentioned
six sons shall take the heritage of him who has no heir belonging to the
first six classes.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.132).—‘Among the twelve kinds of sons, the one
succeeding inherits the property and offers the B?? only in the absence
of the preceeding.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p.??4).—‘The son cast off, the son
born of the pregnant bride, the son adopted, the son bought, the son of
the Śūdra wife, the son s??? given,—those six are non-inheritors;—among
the six sons that are inheritors—*viz*., the Body-born son, the son
begotten on the wife by another man, the son of the Appointed Daughter,
the son of the remarried woman, the son born of an unmarried damsel, the
son born secretly, there is an apportionment of shares;—two parts going
to the father, two to the Body-horn son, and one each to the rest.’

*Hārīta* (*Do*.).—‘Six of the sons are both kinsmen and
inheritors—*viz*., one begotten by oneself on a righteous wife, one
begotten by one’s wife through another man, the son of a remarried
woman, the son of an unmarried damsel, the son of an Appointed Daughter,
and the son secretly born. The son adopted, the son bought, the son cast
off, the son horn of a pregnant bride, the son self-given and the son
found by chance are inheritors, not kinsmen.’

*Devala* (Do., p. 550).—‘These twelve sons have been declared to serve
the purpose of perpetuating one’s line,—they being born of one’s own
body, or of others, or found by chance;—of these, the first six are
kinsmen as well as inheritors of the father. All these inherit the
father’s property, in the absence of a Body-born son.’

*Nārada* (Do., p. 551).—‘The Body-born son, the son begotten on one’s
wife through another man, the son of an Appointed Daughter, the son of
the unmarried damsel, the son born of a pregnant bride, the son secretly
born, the son of the remarried woman, the son east off, the son adopted,
the son bought, the son appointed, the son self-given,—these are the
twelve sons. Of these six are kinsmen as well as inheritors, and six are
only kinsmen, not inheritors;—the preceding one being senior to the
succeeding one.’
