+++
title = "164 षष्ठन् तु"

+++
*Baudhāyana* (2.3.11).—‘If a body-born son is born, the other sons who
belong to the same caste shall obtain a one-third share of the estate.’

*Bṛhaspati* (see above under 163).

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 545).—‘The son begotten on one’s wife through
other men, and the other sons are entitled to five, six and seven
parts.’

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 544).—‘When the body-born son is born,
the other sons belonging to the same caste as the father obtain a third
part of the estate; those belonging to other castes are entitled only to
food and clothing.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 545).—‘When dividing the property, one should give to
the son born of the unmarried damsel, the twenty-first part, the
twentieth part to the son of the remarried woman, the nineteenth to the
son of two fathers (*i.e*., the secretly born son), the eighteenth to
the son begotten on one’s wife through another man, the seventeenth to
the son of the apppointed daughter, and the other sixteen parts to the
body-born son.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘The body-born son even when low-born is entitled
to the entire property; the son begotten on one’s wife by another man
takes the third part, the son of the appointed daughter takes the
fourth, the appointed son takes the fifth, the secretly-born son takes
the sixth, the son cast off takes the seventh part, the son born of the
unmarried damsel takes the eighth, the son horn of the pregnant bride
takes the ninth, the bought sou takes the tenth, the son horn of the
remarried woman takes the eleventh, the self-given son takes the
twelfth, and the Śūdra son takes the thirteenth part of the father’s
estate.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhīta* (Do., p. 547).—‘The estate shall be divided into ten
parts, of which two shall go to the father, two to the body-born son,
three between the sons begotten on one’s wife by another man and the son
of the appointed daughter; and one each to the rest.’
