+++
title = "185 न भ्रातरो"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (17.4-8).—‘The wealth of a man who dies without male issue goes
to his wife; failing her, to his daughter; failing her to his father;
failing him, to his mother; failing her, to his brother; failing him, to
his brother’s sons; failing them, to his kinsmen; failing them, to
*Sakulyas*; failing them, to fellow-students; failing them to the King,
except in the case of the property being a Brāhmaṇa’s.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.135-136).—‘Wife, daughters, parents, brothers,
brother’s sons, *Sagotras*, kinsmen, pupils, fellow-students; among
these the succeeding inherits the property of a man dying without male
issue, only in the absence of the preceding one. Such is the law for all
castes.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Āparārka, pp. 740, 742, 745).—‘The wife being one half of
the man’s body, the man whose wife is alive is himself still alive; and
while one half of his body is alive, how can any one else take his
property? Hence in the case of a man dying without male issue, even
though his father, brothers and *Sapiṇḍas* may be living, it is his wife
who inherits his property. If the man dies without leaving a male issue
or a wife, or brother or father or mother, his property shall be divided
by his *Sapiṇḍas* in proportionate shares. If the man leaves no son, his
*Śrāddha* shall he performed by his wife; and in the absence of the
wife, by his uterine brother;—failing him, other brothers, or brothers’
sons, or *Sapiṇḍas*, or *Sakulyas*, or pupils, or Vedic scholars are
entitled to his wealth.’

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 741).—‘If a man dies without male issue, his
property goes to his brother; failing him, to his mother and father; or
to his senior (or junior) wife.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘The property of the son-less man shall go to his
uterine brothers, or to his daughters of the same caste as himself, or
to his father if he he living, or to brothers of the same caste as
himself, or to his mother, or to his wife;—in this same order.’

*Nārada* (Do.)—‘If among brothers, some one should die, or go away as a
Renunciate, the other brothers shall divide his property among
themselves, except the *Strīdhana*; they shall support his wives as long
as they continue to be faithful to their husband.’

*Gautama* (Do., 742).—‘The wife should obtain the property of one who
dies childless.’

*Vṛddha-manu* (Do.).—‘A widow, without a son, keeping pure the husband’s
bed, and firm in the observance of her duties, shall offer the Hall of
meal to him and take his entire property.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 745).—‘If a man dies after partition, without
leaving a male issue, his father should take his property, or his
brother, or mother, or his father’s mother, in due order.’

*Pāiṭhīnasi* (Vivadaratnākara, p. 592).—‘The property of a son-less man
goes to his brother; failing him to his mother and father, or his eldest
wife, or *Sagotras*, or pupils, or fellow-students.’

*Āpastamba* (Do., p. 596).—‘In the absence of sons, the nearest
*Sapiṇḍa*; failing him, the preceptor; failing him, the pupil.’
