+++
title = "186 त्रयाणाम् उदकम्"

+++
**(verses 9.186-189)  
**

[\[See Text under
185.\]]

*Mānava-Śrāddhakalpa* (III).—(Same as Manu.)

*Āpastamba* (2.14.2-5).—‘On failure of sons, the nearest *Sapiṇḍa* takes
the property; failing him, the preceptor; failing him the pupil, who may
use it for the teacher’s benefit or enjoy it himself; or the daughter
may take the property; on the failure of all relations, let the King
take the property.’

*Gautama* (28.21).—‘*Sapiṇḍas*, *Sagotras*, those connected by descent
from the same *Ṛṣi*, and the wife shall share the estate of a person
dying without male issue (or an Appointed Daughter).’

Do. (28.41, 42).—‘Śrotriyas shall divide the estate of a childless
Brāhmaṇa;—the King shall take the property of the other castes.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.9-15).—‘The great-grand-father, the grand-father, the
father, one’s own-self, the uterine brothers, the son by a wife of equal
caste, the grand-son and the great-grand-son,—these they call
*Sapiṇḍas*; and amongst these, the son and the son’s son (together with
the father) are sharers of an undivided oblation; sharers of divided
oblations, they call *Sakulyas*. If no other relations are living, the
property of the deceased man descends to his *Sapiṇḍas*; on the failure
of *Sapiṇḍas*, the *Sakulyas* inherit; on the failure of these, the
preceptor who takes the place of the spiritual father, a pupil or an
officiating priest shall take the property; on failure of these, the
King, who shall give that property to persons versed in the three Vedas;
but the King shall never take the property of the Brāhmaṇa.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.81-84).—‘The *Sapiṇḍas* or the subsidiary sons shall
divide the property of him who has no son of the first six kinds; on
failure of them, the preceptor and the pupil shall take the property; on
failure of these two, the King inherits; but the King shall never take
the property of a Brāhmaṇa.’

*Viṣṇu* (17.10-14).—‘Failing brother’s sons, the property goes to the
relations called *Bandhu*; failing these, to those called *Sakulya*;
failing these, to a fellow-student; failing him, to the King, except
when it is Brāhmaṇa’s property;—the property of the Brāhmaṇas goes to
Brāhmaṇas.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2. 135-130).—‘The wife, daughters, parents, brothers,
brother’s sons, *Sagotṛa, Bandhu*—relations, pupils,
fellow-students,—from among these in the absence of the preceding, the
succeeding inherits the property of the man who dies without male issue.
This is the law for all castes.’ *Nārada* (Aparārka,p. 715).—‘Inthe
absence of daughters, the property goes to *Sakulyas* and *Bāndhuvas*,
and then to people of the same caste; and failing all these, to the
King. In the absence of all relations, the holy Brāhmaṇas learned in the
Vedas inherit the property; the property of the Brāhmaṇa shall not be
taken by the King; of men of other castes, the property shall be taken
by the King.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Aparārka, p. 716).—‘The property of the learned Brāhmaṇa
goes to the Assembly, *not to* the King.’
