+++
title = "194 अध्यग्न्य्-अध्यावाहनिकन् दत्तम्"

+++
**(verses 9.194-195)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (17.18).—‘What has been given to a woman by her father, mother,
sons, or brothers, what she has received before the sacrificial fire at
the marriage ceremony, what she receives on supersession, what has been
given to her by her relatives, her nuptial fee, and a gift subsequent,
are called *strīdhana*.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.143).—‘What is given to a woman by her father, mother,
son or brother,—what is given before the nuptial fire, and what comes to
her in connection with her supersession has been called *strīdhana*.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 751).—‘What is given to a woman near the
nuptial fire by gentlemen is called *Adhyagni strīdhana*. What the woman
obtains at the time of her being taken away from her father’s house is
called the *Adhyāvāhanika strīdhana*. What is given to her, through
affection, by her father in-law or mother-in-law, at the time of her
bowing to them, is called *Lāvaṇyārjita*. What is obtained by a married
woman or her husband at her father’s house, either from her parents or
her brother, is called *Saudāyika*. Over the *Saudāyika*, the ownership
of the woman is absolute and she is free to sell it or given it away,
even when it consists of immovable property. What the woman obtains,
after marriage, from her husband’s family, or from her husband’s
parents, is called *Anvādheya* by Bhṛgu. While she is alive, neither her
husband nor her sons nor her brother-in-law nor her husband’s kinsmen,
have any rights over her *strīdhana*; if they take it from her they
should he punished.’

*Vṛddha-Vyāsa* (Aparārka, p. 752).—‘Whatever the girl obtains, at
marriage or after marriage, from her father’s or brother’s house, is
called *Saudāyika*. At the marriage of the girl whatever is given with
reference to the bridegroom forms the property of the girl, not to be
divided by her kinsmen.’

*Nārada* (Do., p. 752).—‘What is given to her, through love, by her
husband, that she shall enjoy as site chooses, even after his death,
with the exception of immovable property.’

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 524).—‘*Adhyagni*, *Adhyāvāhanika*,
*Bhartṛdāya* (inherited from her husband), what is given by her brother
and what is given by her mother and what is given by her father,—these
are the six kinds of *strīdhana*.’

*Śukranīti* (4.5.597).—‘The *Saudāyika* property is known to be that
which comes to a married woman through gifts and dowries, from her
parents’ or husband’s families, or through presents from parents and
relatives.’

*Pāraskara* (Parāśaramādhava, Vyavahāra, p. 372).—‘The *strīdhana*
belongs to the unmarried daughter; the son cannot have it; if the
daughter has been married, the son shall share it equally with her.’

[(See the texts under
192-193.)]

*Kātyāyana* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 573).—‘Neither the husband, nor the
son, nor the father, nor the brothers have the right to take away or to
spend a woman’s *strīdhana*; if any one of them takes away the
*strīdhana* forcibly, he should be made to make it good along with
interest, and should also pay a fine; if any one makes use of it with
her permission, and in a manner agreeable to her, he should repay it, if
he has the wealth to do it. Whatever the woman may have lovingly given
to any of the above relations during his sickness or when he was in
trouble or harassed by creditors,—that also he may voluntarily repay.’
