+++
title = "201 अनंशौ क्लीब-पतितौ"

+++
**(verses 9.201-202)  
**

*Gautama* (18.43).—‘An idiot and a eunuch should he supported.’

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 486).—‘According to some, even the son born of
the wife of equal caste should not receive inheritance if she is
addicted to unrighteousness.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.3.37-40)—‘Granting food, clothes and shelter, they shall
support those who are incapable of transacting business; *viz*., the
blind, the idiot, those immersed in vice, the incurable invalid, and the
like;—as also those who are neglectful of their duties and
occupations;—but not the outcast or his offspring.’

*Āpastamba* (2.14.1).—‘He should, during his life-time, divide his
property equally amongst his sons,—excepting the eunuch, the insane and
the outcast.’

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 486)—‘All who are endowed with righteousness
are inheritors of property; if one uses wealth unrighteously, him the
father shall disinherit, even if he be the eldest son.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (17.52-54).—‘But those who have entered a different order
receive no share;—nor those who are eunuchs, insane or outcasts;—the
eunuch and the insane have a claim to maintenance.’

*Viṣṇu* (15.32-33).—‘Outcasts, eunuchs, persons incurably diseased, and
those deficient in organs of sense or action, do not receive a
share;—but they should be maintained by those who take the inheritance.’

*Yājñavalkya* (2.140).—‘The eunuch, the outcast, the son of the outcast,
the cripple, the insane, the idiot, the blind and one suffering from an
incurable disease have no share in the property; but they should be
maintained.’

*Nārada* (Aparārka, p. 749).—‘One who harbours ill-will towards his
father, the outcast, the eunuch and one who has committed one of the
minor offences, should not receive any share, even when they are
body-born sons;—what to say of those that are only *Kṣetraja* sons?’

Do. (Vivādaratnākara, p. 489).—Those suffering from chronic or incurable
diseases, the idiot, the insane, the blind and the cripple should be
supported by the family; but their sons are entitled to shares in the
property.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 750).—‘One born of a wife married irregularly, one
begotten by a *Sagotra* husband, and one who has gone away as a
renunciate, do not inherit property.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 486).—‘One who has been
excommunicated ceases to have any claims to inheritance or the funeral
offering of food and water.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do., p. 487).—‘Even though a son may have been born from a
wife of equal caste, yet he cannot inherit property if he is devoid of
good qualities.’

*Devala* (Do., p. 489).—‘On the father’s death, the eunuch, the leper,
the insane, the idiot, the blind, the outcast, the outcast’s child and
the religious hypocrite, do not share in the inheritance; but food and
clothing are given to all these, except the outcast. The sons of these
however, if they are free from defects, should receive their share in
the property.’
