+++
title = "219 वस्त्रम् पत्रम्"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (18.44).—‘Apparel, vehicles, and ornaments, prepared food,
water, females, property set apart for pious purposes or for sacrifices,
a common pasture-ground and document (or books) are impartible.’

*Gautama* (28.46-47).—‘Water, property set apart for pious uses or for
sacrifices, and prepared food shall not be divided;—nor women already
connected.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 503).—‘There shall he no division
of the dwelling house, or of water-vessels, ornaments, employed women,
clothes, or water-drains,—so says Prajāpati.’

*Vyāsa* (Do., pp. 504-505).—‘Persons for whom one officiates at
sacrifices, agricultural holdings, conveyance, prepared food, water, and
woman are impartible.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., pp. 504-505).—‘Property that has been set apart by
means of a document for religious purposes, water, wives, hereditary
mortgage (*nibandha*?), clothes and ornaments that have been worn,
articles whose division is impossible, pasture-ground, paths,—these
should not be divided.’

*Bṛhaspati* (25.79-85).—‘Those by whom clothes and the like articles
have been declared to he impartible have not taken into consideration
the fact that the wealth of the rich is based upon clothes and
ornaments;—such wealth, when withheld from partition, will yield no
profit; but it cannot be allotted to a single co-parcener. Therefore it
has to be divided with some skill, or else it would be useless.—Clothes
and ornaments are to be divided after selling them (and distributing the
proceeds); a written bond is divided after recovering the amount
involved; prepared food is divided by means of exchange with unprepared
food.—The water of a well or a pool shall be drawn and used according to
need. A single female slave shall be successively made to work at the
houses of the several co-sharers, according to their respective
shares.—If there are many such slaves, they shall be divided equally.
The same rule applies to male slaves also. Property obtained for a pious
purpose shall he divided in equal shares.—Fields and embankments shall
he divided according to the several shares. A common road or
pasture-ground shall be always used by the co-sharers in due proportion
to their several shares.—The clothes, ornaments, bed and the like, as
well as conveyances and such things—appertaining to the father—shall he
given to the person who pertakes of his funeral repast, after honouring
him with fragrant drugs and flowers.’
