+++
title = "235 ब्रह्महा च"

+++
**(verses 9.235-242)  
**

*Baudhāyana* (1.18.18).—‘In case a Brāhmaṇa has slain a Brāhmaṇa, has
violated his guru’s bed, has stolen gold, or has drunk wine,—the King
shall cause him to he branded with heated iron with the mark of a
headless trunk, a female part, a jackal or the sign of the tavern on the
forehead and banish him from his realm.’

*Viṣṇu* (5.1-8).—‘Great criminals should all he put to death;—in the
case of a Brāhmaṇa, no corporal punishment should he inflicted.—A
Brāhmaṇa should he banished from his own country, his body having been
branded.—For murdering another Brāhmaṇa, let a headless corpse be
impressed on his forehead;—for drinking wine, the flag of a
liquor-seller;—for stealing gold, a dog’s foot;—for incest, the mark of
the female part.—If he has committed any other heinous crime, he shall
he banished unhurt, with all his property.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 634).—‘Even though he may have
committed a heinous offence, the Brāhmaṇa should not he killed; he
should he branded and banished with his head shaven.’

*Yama* (Do., 635).—‘In the case of the Brāhmaṇa committing any of the
four capital offences, his head shall be shaved and he shall he
banished; and with a view to proclaiming his crime, he shall be paraded
riding on a donkey; or he may be branded on the forehead.’

*Nārada* (Do.).—‘In the case of the Brāhmaṇa committing any of the four
capital offences,—violating the Guru’s bed, drinking wine, stealing
gold, and killing a Brāhmaṇa,—for violating the Guru’s bed, he should he
branded with the mark of the female part,—for drinking wine, with the
flag of the wine-seller,—for stealing gold, with the mark of the dog’s
foot,—for killing a Brāhmaṇa, the mark of a headless trunk shall be
branded on his forehead; and no one should hold any converse with
him;—such is the teaching of Manu.’
