+++
title = "256 द्विविधांस् तस्करान्"

+++
**(verses 9.256-260)  
**

*Bṛhaspati* (22, 2-5).—‘Thieves are of two kinds:—open and secret. These
are subdivided thousand-fold, according to their skill, ability and
*modus operandi*. Fraudulent traders, quacks, gamblers, corrupt judges,
those who accept bribes, cheats, persons posing as interpreters of omens
or performers of propitiatory rites, mean artists, forgers, hired
servants refusing to do their work, roguish umpires, perjured witnesses,
and jugglers,—these are called *open thieves*. Housebreakers,
highwaymen, robbers of bipeds and quadrupeds, stealers of clothes and
such things, and stealers of grain,—these are *secret thieves*.’

*Nārada* (Theft, 1-5).—‘Two kinds of robbers who steal the goods of
others, have to be distinguished:—the one kind *open* and the other kind
*secret. Open* rogues are those who forge measures and weights or
receive bribes, robbers, gamblers, public prostitutes, those who roam
about in disguise, those who make a living by teaching auspicious
ceremonies,—these and such like persons are considered *open* rogues.
Rogues acting *in secret* are those who roam in the woods, or he
concealed, as well as those who make a profession of stealing. They
attack and rob people who do not beware of them. Those who infest a
country, a village, or a house, or disturb a sacrificial act, cut
purses, and other persons of this sort also are considered to be *secret
rogues*.’
