+++
title = "261 तान् विदित्वा"

+++
**(verses 9.261-263)  
**

*Kāmandaka* (6.10-13).—‘A monarch having adequately determined the guilt
of the wicked persons who have incurred public displeasure, should do
away with them without the least delay, by underhand measures. The King
should invite the offender to meet him in a secret chamber; when the man
has entered the chamber, he should be followed by certain menials with
arms hidden about their person, who had been previously instructed.
Thereupon the royal door-keepers would enter and under the pretence of
suspecting them, should search their persons; and finding the hidden
arms openly accuse the offender with having hired these men for
assassinating the King. In this manner, imputing crimes to the
offenders, the King shall, for the satisfaction of his subjects, weed
out the thorns from his realm.’

*Arthaśāstra* (p. 135).—‘Spies disguised as ascetics, renunciates,
mendicants, bards and so forth should be employed by the King to find
out the wickedness or otherwise of the people and the King’s officers.
If there is any one whom he suspects of dishonest ways of life, the King
shall have him shadowed by a man of the same caste; when this latter has
won the man’s confidence,—who for example is a judge—he should address
him these words—“Such and such a relation of mine has been accused of an
offence, do please save him from the danger, and here accept this money
for the purpose.” If the judge falls into the trap and accepts the
bribe, he should be banished by the King as one addicted to dishonesty.’

*Brhaṣpati* (22.6).—‘Thieves or robbers, having been found out by the
King’s servants, either by associating with them, or through marks of
their criminality, or by their possessing the stolen goods, they shall
be compelled to restore the plunder and shall be visited with
punishments ordained by the law.’

*Nārada* (Vivādaratnākara, p. 293).—‘Having found out the thieves and
robbers through clever spies conversant with the methods adopted by
criminals, the King shall follow them up and have them arrested by
secretly instructed spies.’

Do. (Theft: 61).—‘As governor, the King shall extirpate the evil-doers,
after having traced them by the application of cunning stratagems and
arrested them.’
