+++
title = "313 पराम् अप्य्"

+++
**(verses 9.313-322)  
**

*Mahābhārata* (13.152.16, 21-23).—‘Brāhmaṇas depend upon the Kṣatriya,
not the Kṣatriya on the Brāhmaṇa. There is none who can deprive me—says
Arjuna—of any kingdom; I am therefore superior to the Brāhmaṇa.’

Do. (12.56.24).—(Same as Manu 321.)

Do. (12.78.21).—(Same as Manu 320.)

*Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa* (4.1.4.4-6.)

*Gautama* (11.14).—‘It is declared in the Veda—“Kṣatriyas, who are
assisted by Brāhmaṇas, prosper and do not fall into distress.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (19.4).—‘It is declared in the Veda—“A realm where a Brāhmaṇa
is appointed domestic priest prospers.”’

*Nārada* (18.12).—‘On account of their dignity and sanctity, it is not
permitted to either advise or rebuke a King or a Brāhmaṇa, unless they
swerve from the path of duty.’

Do. (18.34-39).—‘Let a king be constantly intent upon showing honour to
the Brāhmaṇas; a field furnished with Brāhmaṇas is the root of the
prosperity of the world. A Brāhmaṇa may command respect and a
distinguished seat at the King’s Court; the King shall show his face in
the morning before the Brāhmaṇas first of all, and shall salute them
all.—When nine or seven persons meet, they shall first make room for the
Brāhmaṇa to pass by. Brāhmaṇas shall also have free access to the houses
of other people, for the purpose of begging alms; also the right to
collect fuel, flowers, water and the like, without its being regarded as
*theft*,—and to converse with men’s wives, without restraint;—and also
the right to cross rivers without paying any fare, and to be conveyed to
the other bank before other people. When engaged in trading and using a
ferryboat, they shall pay no toll.—A Brāhmaṇa engaged in travelling, who
is tired and has nothing to eat, commits no wrong by taking two canes of
sugar or two esculent roots.’

*Arthaśāstra* (1.47).—‘The Kṣatriya Power is gloriously victorious when
it is augmented by the Brāhmaṇas, embellished by the counsel of
ministers, and supported by the deductions of the scriptures.’

*Viṣṇu-dharmottara* (Vīramitrodaya-Rājanīti, p. 150).—‘The King shall
never take a Brāhmaṇa’s property; he shall always protect it.... Even
though the Brāhmaṇa be devoid of learning or of vicious conduct, he
shall never bear ill-will towards him.’
