+++
title = "333 धर्मेण च"

+++
**(verses 9.333-336)  
**

*Viṣṇupurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava-Ācāra, p. 419).—‘It is only through
attending upon the twice-born that the Śūdra becomes entitled to perform
the *Pākayajñas*; and thereby becoming blessed, he wins the worlds.—The
Śūdra also shall make gifts, and perform the Pākayajña-sacrifices, as
also the rites in honour of Pitṛs.’

*Mahābhārata*—*Anuśāsana* (Do.).—‘Finding the Śūdra oppressed with bad
traits due to the quality of Tamas, Pitāmaha ordained attendance upon
the twice-born as his duty. Through his devotion to the twice-born, the
Śūdra drops off all those traits due to the quality of Tamas; and by
attending upon the twice-born, the Śūdra attains the highest
good.—Harmless, devoted to good deeds, worshipful towards gods and the
twice-born, the Śūdra becomes endowed with all the rewards of Dharma.’

*Mahābhārata—Śānti* (Parāśaramādhava-Ācāra, p. 420).—‘The syllables
*svāhā* and *namaḥ* are the mantras prescribed for the Śūdra; by means
of these shall the Śūdra offer the Pākayajña-Sacrifices; he shall never
amass wealth; having acquired wealth by service, he shall win the
affection of his elders; and if he is righteously inclined, he may make
gifts when permitted to do so by the King.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Do., p. 419).—‘Attached to his wife, pure, supporting his
dependants, devoted to the performance of Śrāddhas, he should never omit
to perform the Five Sacrifices by means of ths mantra *namaḥ*.’

Do. (Do., p. 422).—‘If he cannot make a living by service of the
twice-born, the Śūdra may become a trader, or obtain a living by means
of the arts, always acting for the welfare of the twice-born.’

*Parāśara* (Ācāra, 65).—‘The Śūdra may make a living by the sale of
salt, honey, oil, curds, *takra*, clarified butter and milk.—But the
Śūdra becomes immediately degraded by selling wine and flesh, by eating
what should not he eaten, and by approaching women who should not be
approached. The Śūdra falls immediately by drinking the milk of the
*Kapilā* cow, by approaching a Brāhmaṇa woman and by pronouncing the
words of the Veda.’
