+++
title = "006 वेदो ऽखिलो"

+++
**(Verses 6, 10 and 12)  
**

*Baudhāyana, Dharmasūtra*, 1.1.6.—‘Dharma has been enjoined in each
Veda.’ ‘The second source of knowledge consists of the Smṛtis.’ ‘The
third is what proceeds from the cultured, *i. e*., those persons who are
free from jealousy and selfishness, fairly well off, free from avarice,
haughtiness, greed, delusion, and anger.’ ‘Those persons are *cultured*
who have studied the Vedas along with their supplements and who are
versed in the art of making deductions from them; those are the persons
from whom the direct knowledge of Śruti can be derived.’

*Gautama*, *Dharmasūtra*, 1.1-2.—‘Veda is the source of Dharma’: ‘the
*Smṛti* and *Śīla* of persons learned in the Veda.’

*Āpastamba, Dharmasūtra*, 1.2-3.—‘The convention of persons knowing
Dharma is authoritative’: ‘and also the Vedas.’

*Vaśiṣṭha, Smrti*, 1.4-6.—‘In the absence of Śruti and Smṛti, the custom
of the cultured is authoritative’: ‘those persons are *cultured* whose
mind is free from selfish desires’: ‘that is to be regarded as Dharma
which is not prompted by a selfish motive.’

*Yajñavalkya, Smṛti*, 1-7.—‘Śruti, Smṛti, the practice of good men,
self-satisfaction determination based upon right volition,—these four
are the source of Dharma.’

*Āpastamba, Dharmasūtra*, 1.4.7.—‘The Śruti is more authoritative than
custom which derives its authority only from assumption (of
corroboration of Śruti).’

*Ibid*, 30.9.—‘In cases of conflict, what is stated in the Śruti is more
authoritative.’

*Jaimini*, the writer of the Mīmāṃsā-sūtra (1.1.2), has emphatically
declared that the Vedic Injunction is the only trustworthy source of our
knowledge of Dharma, *i.e*., of what is *right*, *i.e*., what is
conducive to good, temporal and spiritual (Vaiśeṣika-Sütra 1.1.2);
though he knew of the later ‘lawbooks, Smṛtis, and customs,’ yet he had
no hesitation in declaring that these are to be relied upon only so far
as they are not repugnant to anything declared in the Veda.

Coming to the strictly legal writers we find—1. Baudhāyana, (1.1.1-6)
naming—(*a*) *Veda*, (*b*) the *Smṛti*, and (2) ‘*Śiṣṭāgama*,’—the
‘*Āgama*,’ teaching, of the ‘*Śiṣṭas*’ ‘cultured’ men;—*i*. *e*., ‘those
who are free from ill-feeling, devoid of vanity, possessed of sufficient
grain, not greedy, devoid of hypocrisy, haughtiness, avarice, stupidity
and anger;—those who have studied, in the right manner, the Veda along
with its supplements and are well versed in making deductions out of
them.’

\[There is no mention of ‘custom’ here at all. It is ‘scripture’ pure
and simple; but no longer the Veda only, but also the *Smṛtis*, and the
deductions therefrom and *teachings* based thereupon by persons with
very special qualifications.\]

*Parāśara*, 1.20.—‘At the beginning of each Kalpa, there appear Brahmā,
Viṣṇu and Śiva......... the propounders of (1) *Śruti*, (2) *Smṛti* and
(3) *Sadāchāra*.’

> *kalpe kalpe kṣayotyattau brahmaviṣṇumaheśvarāḥ* \|  
> *śrutismṛtisadācāranirṇetāraśva sarvadā* \|\|

To the same end we have Āpastamba (1.1.2-3) declaring that the
‘convention or opinion of those versed in Dharma’ and ‘also the Veda,’
are the authority. It only means that when those learned in Dharma are
agreed in regard to the righteousness of a certain course of action,
that is to be accepted as authoritative.

This is made clear by Vaśiṣṭha (1.4-6)—‘In the event of the aforesaid’
(*i.e*., Śruti and Smṛti) not being available, the *practice of cultured
men* is the authority,—the cultured man being defined as one who is
entirely unselfish, having no desires of his own.

The same opinion is expressed more definitely by Gautama (1.1.
1-2)—‘Veda is the source of Dharma, also the *Smṛti* (Recollection) and
*Śīla* of those learned in the Veda.’

\[In all this ‘custom’ begins to be admitted; but only that of the
‘cultured.’\]

The next step in advance is taken by Manu (2.6)—

> *vido'khilo dharmamūlaṃ smṛtiśīle ca tadvidām* \|  
> *ācāraśvaica sādhūnāmātmanastuṣṭireva ca* \|\|

Also *Vyāsa*—

> *dharmamūlaṃ vedamāhuḥ grantharāśimakṛtrimam* \|  
> *tadvidāṃ smṛtiśīle ca sādhvācāraṃ manaḥpriyam* \|\|

By this the sources of Dharma are (1) *Veda*, (2) *Smṛti*, (3)
*Sadāchāra* and (4) ‘*Svasya priyam*.’

\[What is exactly meant by these terms we shall see later on.\] The same
is recapitulated in Manu (2.12)—

> *vedaḥ smṛtiḥ sadācāraḥ svasya ca priyamātmanaḥ* \|  
> *etaccaturvidhaṃ prāhuḥ sākṣāddharmasya lakṣaṇam* \|\|

This is slightly improved upon by Yājñavalkya (1.7)—

> *śrutiḥ smṛtiḥ sadācāraḥ svasya ca priyamātmanaḥ* \|  
> *samyaksaṅkalpajaḥ kāmo dharmamūlamidaṃ smṛtam* \|\|

By which the sources of law are fivefold:—(1) *Veda*, (2) *Smṛti*, (3)
*Sadāchāra*, (1) *Svasya priyam* and (5) *Samyak-saṅkalpaja Kāma*. \[For
the exact signification of these, see below.\]

Thus the sources of Law are: (1) ‘*Śruti*,’ (2) ‘*Smrti*’ (3)
‘*Sadāchāra*’—‘practices of the good’ (with regard to these there is
unanimity among all old authorities), (4) ‘*Svasya priyam*’ or
‘*ātmanastuṣṭiḥ*,’ ‘self-satisfaction.’ In regard to the fourth also
Manu and Yājñavalkya are agreed. In Manu however we find one thing more,
which is not found in Yājñavalkya—*viz*., ‘*Sīla*’; and Yājñavalkya
speaks of ‘*Samyaksaṅkalpajaḥ kāmaḥ*,’ which is not found in Manu.
Vīramitrodaya on Yājña has identified these two.

We shall see now what these terms mean according to the Commentators and
the more important Digest-writers.



### (A) Śruti

*Medhātithi on Manu*, 2.6.—The word ‘Veda’ stands for the Ṛgveda,
Yajurveda, and Sāmaveda (also Atharva Veda), along with their respective
Brāhmaṇas, There are 21 Recensions of the Ṛgveda, 100 of the Yajurveda,
1,000 of the Sāmaveda and 9 of the Atharvaveda. The Vedic character of
the Atharva cannot be denied, because, like the other Vedas, this also
is not the work of a human author, it helps to make known man’s duties,
it is free from mistakes, it prescribes the Jyotiṣṭoma and such other
rites exactly in the same manner as the other Vedas do. \[This is denied
by Vīramitrodaya on Yājñavalkya; see below.\] Though there are certain
texts that forbid the study of the Atharva Veda, yet all that this means
is that one should not confuse the teachings of the other Vedas with
those of the Atharva; for instance, at the performance of rites in
accordance with the three other Vedas, one should not use Mantras of the
Atharva Veda.

This ‘Veda’ is the ‘root,’ *i.e*., source, cause, of dharma, in the
sense that it *makes it known*, and it does this by means chiefly of
such passages in the *Brāhmaṇas* as contain injunctive expressions;
sometimes also by means of *Mantras*. And the other parts of the
Veda—the Arthavāda or Declamatory Passages—have their use in eulogising
what is enjoined by the corresponding injunction; Mantras and names help
in indicating the details of the acts prescribed.

*Sarvajñanārāyaṇa on Manu*, 26.—When Manu speaks of the ‘*entire Veda*,’
he means to include the *Arthavādas*, commendatory and condemnatory
exaggerations, also.

*Kullūka on Manu*, 26.—‘Veda’ stands for the Ṛk, Yajus, Sāman and
Atharvan; the whole of these, including the injunctions, Mantras and
Arthavādas, the last also serving the purpose of helping the injunction
by persuasion. Both Mantras and Arthavādas serve the useful purpose not
only of persuasion, but also of reminding the agent of the details of
the action undertaken. The authority of *Śruti* and the rest also rests
upon.the fact of their having their source in the Veda.

*Rāghavānanda on Manu*, 2.6.—Ṛk, Yajus, Sāman and Atharvan are the
authority for Dharma.

*Viśvarūpa on Yājña*, 1.3-7.—‘Śruti’ is to be taken, not in the strictly
limited sense of the ‘Mantra and Brāhmaṇa texts,’ but for all the
fourteen ‘Sciences’—the Four Vedas, their six ‘subsidiaries’ or ‘limbs,’
Purāṇa, Nyāya, Mīmānsā, and Dharmaśāstra.

*Mitākṣarā on Yājña*, 1.7.—‘*Śruti*’ is Veda.

\(I\) *Aparārka on Yājña*, 1.7.—‘Śruti’ is *Veda*—it is the only
determining factor in all matters relating to the Agnihotra and other
rites. As Vyāsa says, this is the only *pure* authority (*i.e*.,
entirely trustworthy), all the rest being ‘adulterated,’ *i.e*., of
doubtful authority; that law is the highest which is learnt from the
Veda, what is propounded in the Purāṇas and other works being of a lower
grade.

Says Manu—‘The Veda embodies all knowledge’ (2.7).

‘The learned man should enter upon his own duties, resting upon the
authority of the Revealed Word’ (2.8). ‘The Veda should be known as the
Revealed Word, Śruti’ (2.10).

*Vīramitrodaya-Tīkā on Yājña*, 1.7.—‘Śruti’ is *Veda*—as in Manu (2.10).
It is the sole authority in regard to *Agnihotra* and such rites.

*Vīramitrodaya-Paribhāṣā*, pp. 8-25.—‘Śruti’ stands for ‘Veda,’ which,
according to Āpastamba’s definition, is the name given to the
‘collection of Mantra and Brāhmaṇa texts’;—the ‘whole’ of this
authoritative, *i.e*., the direct, texts themselves, as also those that
are deducible from the implications of ‘Indication,’ ‘Syntactical
Connection,’ ‘Context,’ ‘Position’ and ‘Name,’ and also the
transformations undergone by the original texts under well-recognised
principles. Another implication of the epithet ‘entire’ is that the
*Atharva Veda* also is to be accepted as authoritative, and not only the
‘trinity of Vedas,’ as one might be led to suppose from the words of
Āpastamba, who says that ‘Dharma is to be learnt from the three Vedas.’
It would be wrong to deny the authority of the Atharva Veda, because,
even though it has nothing to say regarding the setting up of the
Sacrificial Pires or the details of the Agnihotra and other rites, yet
on certain matters it is our only authority; such propitiatory rites for
instance as those relating to the ‘Tulāpuruṣa’ and the like, which
affect all the castes. When we speak of these being the ‘source of
dharma,’ ‘means of knowing what Dharma, Right, is,’ it follows that they
are the means of knowing also what ‘Adharma’ ‘wrong’ is; it is necessary
to understand what is ‘wrong’ in order to discard it and thereby prepare
the mind for perceiving what is ‘right.’

This ‘Śruti’ operates in the following seven forms:

\(1\) The Injunction or Mandatory text—*e.g*., ‘one shall sacrifice the
goat to Yāyu’—this is a trustworthy guide as to what one should do.

\(2\) The Prohibitive Text—*e.g*., ‘one shall not eat the flesh of an
animal killed by the poisoned arrow this is a guide as to what one shall
avoid.

\(3\) The ‘Declamatory’ text of two kinds: the commendatory and the
condemnatory; the former serves the purpose of delineating the
excellence of the course of action enjoined by the Mandatory text;
*e.g*., the text ‘Vāyu is the eftest deity,’ serves to indicate the
excellent properties of the deity Vāyu to whom the offering of the goat
has been enjoined; the condemnatory text serves to deprecate the course
of action prohibited; *e.g*., the assertion that ‘the tears of weeping
Rudra became silver’ is meant to deprecate the giving of silver as the
sacrificial fee, which has been forbidden by a prohibitive text. Texts
of this declamatory kind are of use sometimes in settling a doubtful
point: *e.g*., it having been enjoined that one should place *wet
pebbles* under the altar, and the injunction being silent as to the
substance with which the pebble is to be wetted, the doubt on this point
is settled by a subsequent ‘declamatory’ text, ‘clarified butter is
glory itself,’ which clearly indicates the clarified butter as the
substance with which the pebbles are to be wetted.

\(4\) The *Mantra* text—*e.g*., ‘*Devasya tvā savituḥ*,’ etc., serves to
remind the performer of the details of the performance in the shape of
the deity and so forth.

\(5\) The proper names of particular sacrifices help in the determining
of the exact action connoted by the common root ‘*yaji*,’ ‘to sacrifice’
occurring in the injunctive text.

\(6\) The meaningless syllables, *stobhas*, introduced in the
Sāma-chant, serve the purpose of marking time and cadence;

and (7) the Upaniṣad text serves to promulgate that knowledge of Brahman
which destroys all evil.

*Parāśara*, 1-20—speaks of the ‘propounders of Śruti’ appearing at the
beginning of each *kalpa*. From the words it would seem as if the three
gods—Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara were the said ‘propounders.’ But
Mādhava (p. 98) takes the ‘propounders of Śruti, Smṛti and Sadāchāra’
separately from Brahmā, etc., and he supplies a peculiar account of the
‘propounders of Śruti’—which extends the scope of the authority of this
source of knowledge. He says that by the ‘propounders of Śruti’ here are
meant

\(1\) *Vyāsa*, who divided the Vedic text into the several recensions;

\(2\) the expounders of those Recensions—such as Kaṭha and Kuthuma;

\(3\) the contents of Kalpasūtras, such as Baudhāyana, Āśvalāyana, aud
Āpastamba, and also the ‘*authors*’ of the Mīmāṃsāsūtras, Jaimini and
the rest.

*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda-Saṃskara-Sāra MSS*.—The Veda is the main authority for
Dharma. Any inconsistencies that may be found in it can be easily
explained away. This authority belongs not only to the Injunctions, but
also to Mantras, names and declamatory passages.

*Smṛticandrikā*, p. 3.—The Veda is authoritative as it is independent of
human authorship.



### (B) Smṛti

*Medhātithi on Manu, 2.6*.—‘*Smṛti*’ is Recollection and ‘*Śīla*’
denotes freedom from love, hatred and such improper feelings; this
latter, according to one explanation, is a means of *accomplishing
Dharma*, and not a means of *knowing it*; and it has been separately
mentioned in the present connection only with a view to emphasise its
importance. Not satisfied with this, he has taken the two terras
‘*Smṛti*’ and ‘*Śīla*’ in the compound as inter-related; and as together
standing for a single *means of knowing Dharma*, in the shape of
‘Recollection during that state of the mind when it is calm, free from
all disturbing influences of love, hatred and so forth’,—i.e.,
‘Conscientious Recollection.’ The authority of ‘Smṛti’ thus becomes
qualified. Even though a certain writer may be a *Ṛṣi* versed in Veda,
yet if his ‘recollection’ and its compilation come about at a time when
his mind was perturbed by discordant feelings, much trust cannot be
placed upon such ‘Recollection.’

This again has to be taken along with ‘*Sādhūmām*’; so that we have a
threefold condition for the trustworthiness of a writer of Smṛti:—

1.  he must be *learned* (‘*tādvidām*’),
2.  he must be ‘conscientious,’ ‘free from love and hatred’ (‘*Śīla*’),
3.  and he must be ‘righteous’ (‘*Sādhūmām*’), be habitually engaged in
    carrying out the injunctions of the Veda.

The upshot of the whole is that when a person is found to be recognised
and spoken of by all wise and learned persons as endowed with the said
three qualifications—and a certain compilation is also recognised as
made by that person,—the word of such a person as found in his
recognised work, should be recognised as an authoritative exponent of
Dharma. Sc that even at the present day if there were such a person and
he were to compose a work, then for all later generations that work
would be regarded just as highly as those of Manu and others. This is
the reason why Medhātithi is averse to the practice of enumerating the
authoritative ‘Smṛtis.’ (Trans., p. 204.)

*Sarvajñanārāyaṇa on Manu*, 2.6.—In cases where no Vedic texts are
available, the law can be determined with the help of the *Smṛti* of
persons learned in the Veda—the term ‘*Smṛti*’ standing for the
reflections over a certain subject, as also the treatises embodying
those reflections.

*Kullūka on Manu*, 2.6.—The Smṛti of ‘*persons learned in the Veda*’ is
authoritative,—this last qualification being added for the purpose of
indicating that the authority of Smṛti is due to its having its source
in the Veda.

*Rāghavānanda on Manu*, 2.6.—‘*Smṛti*’ stands for the work of Manu and
others. It stands here for only such *Smṛti* as is not incompatible with
tho Veda. All the rest are to be rejected whenever they are found to be
repugnant to any direct text of the Veda. But where there is no such
repugnance, we are justified in assuming that the Smṛti must be based
upon a Vedic text now lost to us; and it is on this assumption that its
trustworthiness rests.

*Nandana on Manu*, 2.6.—The ‘Smṛti of men learned in the Veda.’ This
stands for *Smṛtis, Purāṇas* and *Itihāsas*.

*Viśvarūpa on Yājña*, 1.7.—‘Smṛti’ and ‘Dharmaśāstra’ are synonymous
terms. “How do we know that the *Smṛtis* are all *based upon the Veda*,
from which they derive their authority? Certainly we do not find Vedic
texts in support of everything that is ordained in the Smṛtis. As for
the Vedic texts that are found to support some Smṛti assertions, such
support is found also in the case of the heterodox scriptures.”—The
simple answer to this question is that in the face of the direct
assertion of Manu and other Smṛti-writers that their work is ‘based on
the Veda,’ we have no justification for thinking otherwise. They being
great Vedic scholars, could not have lied on this point. As a matter of
fact also we find that every one of the injunctions contained in the
Smṛtis has its source in the Veda; in some cases the connection is
*direct*, in others *indirect*; for instance, we have the single Vedic
injunction ‘one should study the Veda’; now studying is not possible
without *teaching*, hence the injunction of teaching is implied by the
former—the *teaching* cannot be done without some one to teach; this
implies the receiving and initiating of a pupil; this implies the
necessity of having children; this again that of *marrying* and so on;
most of the other injunctions may have their source traced in the single
Vedic text.

\(I\) *Aparārka on Yājña*, 1.7.—‘Smṛti’ is that ordinance which, in
matters relating to Dharma, has its source in the Veda; its authority is
‘adulterated,’ *i.e*., not so absolute as that of *Śruti*; it supplies
us with information regarding the duties of all castes and the four
life-stages; one should carefully do all that has been ordained,
*Smṛtam*, by persons most learned in the Veda and eschew what is
forbidden by them. \[This writer like Kumārila makes a distinction
between ‘Smṛti’ and ‘Purāṇa.’\] There are chances of our going astray in
the matter of interpreting a Vedic text and learning the law from it;
but there is no fear of any such mistake being committed by the
Smṛti-writers who were thoroughly well-versed in the Vedic lore. \[From
this it would seem that this writer flourished during the transition
period, when the centre of gravity was beginning to shift from the Veda
towards the Smṛti.\]

*Mitākṣarā on Yājña*, 1.7.—‘*Smrti*’ is Dharmaśāstra.

*Vīramitrodaya on Yājña*, 1.7.—‘*Smṛti*’ is ‘Dharmaśāstra’—‘Legal
Ordinances’ (Manu 2-10); it is the sole authority regarding the *Aṣṭakā*
and such rites.

*Vīramitrodaya-Paribhāṣā*, pp. 8-25.—‘Of persons learned in the Veda’;
this has been added with a view to make clear that the authority of the
Smṛtis does not rest upon themselves: it is derived entirely from the
fact of their having their source in the Veda. The name ‘Smṛti’ stands
for the legal ordinances, ‘Dharmaśāstra,’ compiled by Yājñavalkya and
others.

*Madanapārijāta*, p. 11.—Manu is the most important of the expounders of
law. Among others, some are mentioned by Yājñavalkya (see above). But
this list is not exhaustive. Though all these ‘expounders’ do not always
agree, yet, on the main principles, they are all agreed; the
differences, if any, are confined to minor points; and these latter
discrepancies can always he explained.

*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda-Saṃskāra MSS*.—“How can any authority attach to the
Smṛtis of Manu and others, which being of human origin are open to the
suspicion of the possibility of all those defects to which human writers
are liable; and for this reason these cannot be regarded as
authoritative in the same manner as the Vedas are, whose authority is
above suspicion.”—The answer to this is that inasmuch as these Smṛtis
are found to be mere reproductions of what is contained in the Veda,
they must be regarded as duly authoritative. The very name ‘Smṛti,’
‘Recollection,’ implies that they only reproduce what the authors have
learnt elsewhere; and as Manu and others are known to have been learned
in the Veda it stands to reason that knowing as they did that the Veda
was the sole authority on Dharma, when they proceeded to note down for
the benefit of others what the laws were that regulated *Dharma*, they
could not but have drawn upon the Veda. It is true that they arc found
to contain many rules that we cannot trace to the Veda as known to us;
but if they were mere reproductions of whatever is found in the Veda, no
one would care for them. So we are led to the inference that as on most
of the points dealt with by them, their assertions are found to be based
on Vedic texts, the other points also must have had their source in the
Veda; but in those Vedic texts that have become lost to us. We have the
Veda itself testifying to the trustworthy character of at least one
Smṛti-writer, Manu—‘Whatever Manu has said is wholesome.’

*Smrticandrikā*, pp. 1 *et scq*.—The ordinances composed by Manu and
other writers, being based on the Veda, are our sole authority on
Dharma. That the Smṛtis have their source in the Veda is deduced from
the fact that they only expound what is contained in the Veda. Says
Bhṛgu—‘Whatever Dharma has been expounded by Manu has all been set forth
in the Veda.’ *Śaṅkara* also says that ‘the Smṛtis have their source in
the Veda.’ But this refers to only what the Smṛti says regarding
spiritual matters, and not to what they lay down regarding temporal
matters; as is distinctly declared in the Purāṇa—‘All these (smṛtis)
have their source in the Veda—save those portions that deal with visible
(temporal) matters.’

*Question*.—“When the Smṛti itself only expounds whatever is already set
forth in the Veda and is on that account, based upon the Veda, then the
Veda itself being sufficient for all purposes, what is the use of the
Smṛti or *Dharmaśāstra*?”—The Smrticandrikā quotes Marīci as giving the
answer to this question—‘The requisite texts of the Veda are difficult
to understand and are scattered about in various places; all these are
collected and explained by the Smṛtis.’

The Purāṇas are also included under Smṛti, as the Veda itself names
‘Itihāsa-Purāṇa’ along with ‘the four Vedas.’ Viṣṇu also places the
Purāṇas on the same footing as ‘Manu-Smṛti,’ ‘Veda and its subsidiary
sciences,’ ‘Science of Healing.’

This establishes the authority of the authors of the Gṛhyasūtras also;
since all that these do is to lay down practical manuals setting forth
the details of the various rites along with the necessary Mantras
belonging to that individual Vedic recension to which the manual is
inferred to appertain. As says Devala—‘Manu and others are the
expounders of the Law; the authors of the Gṛhyas are the expounders of
the application of Law.’

*Saṃskāra-Mayūkha*, p. 2.—The Smṛti includes the *Āyurveda* Smṛtis also,
as also Purāṇa and the astronomical ‘Saṃhitās,’ compilations of
Varāhamihira and others; as also the Saṃhitā texts which are included in
the Skandapurāṇa.

Now we have got to determine what works are entitled to be classed under
‘*Smṛti*’ or ‘*Dharma-Śāstra*,’ which latter is what is meant by
‘*Smrti*.’

The original Smṛti-writers are thus enumerated by Yājñavalkya (1.4-5):—

1.  Manu,
2.  Viṣṇu,
3.  Yama,
4.  Aṅgiras,
5.  Vaśiṣṭha,
6.  Dakṣa,
7.  Saṃvarta,
8.  Śātātapa,
9.  Parāśara,
10. Āpastamba,
11. Uśanas,
12. Vyāsa,
13. Kātyāyana,
14. Bṛhaspati,
15. Gautama,
16. Śaṅkha-Likhita,
17. Hārīta,
18. Atri,
19. and Yājñavalkya himself.

The following is from Parāśara (Ācāra 12-15), where Vyāsa relates to his
father the Smṛtis he has already learnt:

1.  Manu,
2.  Vaśiṣṭha,
3.  Kaśyapa,
4.  Garga,
5.  Gautama,
6.  Uśanas,
7.  Atri,
8.  Viṣṇu,
9.  Saṃvarta,
10. Dakṣa,
11. Aṅgiras,
12. Śātātapa,
13. Hārīta,
14. Yājñavalkya,
15. Āpastamba,
16. Śaṅkha,
17. Likhita,
18. Kātyāyana,
19. Pracetas.

On Parāśara (1.20), which speaks of ‘propounders of Smṛti,’ Mādhava (p.
98), mentions the following additional names:

1.  Vyāsa,
2.  Yama,
3.  Parāśara,
4.  Bhṛgu,
5.  Nārada,
6.  Baudhāyana,
7.  Pitāmaha,
8.  Sumantu,
9.  Kāśyapa,
10. Babhru,
11. Paiṭhīnasi,
12. Vyāghra,
13. Satyavrata,
14. Bharadvāja,
15. Kārṣṇājini,
16. Jābāli,
17. Jamadagni,
18. Lokākṣi.

The Smṛticandrikā reproduces the same list.

Yājñavalkya and Kātyāyana being omitted, these two lists make the number
36.

The same writer quotes from the Mahābhārata the following:—

1.  Umā-Maheśvara,
2.  andi,
3.  Brahmā,
4.  umāra,
5.  Dhūmrāyaṇa,
6.  Kaṇva,
7.  Vaiśvānara,
8.  Bhṛgu,
9.  Yājñavalkya,
10. Mārkaṇḍeya,
11. Kuśika,
12. Bharadvāja,
13. Bṛhaspati,
14. Kuni,
15. Kuṇibāhu,
16. Viśvāmitra,
17. Sumantu,
18. Jaimini,
19. Śakuni,
20. Pulastya,
21. Pulaha,
22. Pāvaka,
23. Agastya,
24. Mudgala,
25. Śāṇḍilya,
26. Solabhāyana,
27. Bālakhilya,
28. Saptarṣi,
29. Vyāghra,
30. Vyāsa,
31. Vibhāṇḍaka,
32. Vidura,
33. Bhṛgu,
34. Aṅgiras,
35. Vaiśampāyana.

The Smṛticandrikā reproduces Paiṭhīnasi’s list (given by Mādhava), but
adds that the list is not exhaustive, as in addition to them there are
others also, *eg*., Vatsa, Marīci, Devala, Pāraskara, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu, Ṛṣyaśṛṅga, Likhita and Chāgaleva. It quotes *Śaṅkha* as
enumerating

1.  Manu,
2.  Yama,
3.  Dakṣa,
4.  Viṣṇu,
5.  Aṅgiras,
6.  Bṛhaspati,
7.  Uśanas,
8.  Āpastamba,
9.  Gautama,
10. Saṃvarta,
11. Ātreya,
12. Hārīta,
13. Kātyāyana,
14. Śaṅkha,
15. Likhita,
16. Parāśara,
17. Vyāsa,
18. Śātātapa,
19. Pracetas,
20. Yājñavalkya.

Also Aṅgiras quoted mentions the following and calls them *Upa-Smṛti*:

1.  Logākṣi,
2.  Kāśyapa,
3.  Vyāsa,
4.  Sanatkumāra,
5.  Śāntanu,
6.  Janaka,
7.  Vyāghra,
8.  Kātyāyana,
9.  Jātūkarṇa,
10. Kapiñjala,
11. Baudhāyana,
12. Kaṇāda,
13. and Viśvāmitra.

Yājñavalkya’s and Paiṭhīnasi’s lists are reproduced also by the
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 2). To them it adds ‘Viśvāmitra and the rest.’

The Purāṇa has been defined as that which has five characteristic
features in the shape of the accounts of (1) Creation, (2) Dissolution,
(3) Genealogy, (4) Age-Cycles, and (5) History of Dynasties.

The Viṣṇupurāna names the following eighteen Purāṇas and the Bhāgavata
adds the number of verses in each:

1.  Brahma, 10,000,
2.  Padma, 55,000,
3.  Viṣṇu, 23,000,
4.  Śiva, 24,000,
5.  Bhāgavata, 18,000,
6.  Nāradīya, 25,000,
7.  Mārkaṇḍeya, 9,000,
8.  Agni, 15,400,
9.  Bhaviṣya, 14,500,
10. Brahmavaivarta, 18,000,
11. Liṅga, 10,600,
12. Varāha, 24,500,
13. Skanda, 81,000,
14. āmana, 10,000,
15. Kūrma, 17.000,
16. Matsya, 14,000,
17. Garuḍa, 19,000
18. and Brahmāṇḍa, 12,000.

Total number of verses, 4,00,000.

The *Brahmavaivarta* has the *Vāyupurāṇa* in place of the Brahmāṇḍa, and
this diversity is due to the two enumerations referring to two distinct
cycles.

In addition to these eighteen ‘Purāṇas,’ there are 18 ‘Upapurāṇas,’
‘secondary Purāṇas.’ These have been named in the Kūrmapurāṇa:

1.  Sanatkumāra,
2.  Narasiṃha, 18.000,
3.  Nānda (recited by Kumāra),
4.  Śivadharma (recited by Nandīśvara),
5.  Nāradīya,
6.  Durvāsas,
7.  Kāpila,
8.  Mānava,
9.  Uśanas,
10. Brahmāṇḍa,
11. Vāruṇa,
12. Kālikā,
13. Māheśvara,
14. Śāmba,
15. Saura,
16. Parāśara,
17. Mārīca,
18. and Bhārgava.

In place of ‘Nānda,’ the *Brahmavaivarta* has *Vāśiṣṭha-Laiṅga*.

The Saṃskāramayūkha also reproduces the lists of the Viṣṇupurāṇa (for
Purāṇas) and of Kūrmapurāṇa (for Upapurāṇas).

*Vīramitrodaya*, *Paribhāṣā*, pp. 10-24.—The knowledge of ‘Veda’ implies
also the knowledge of certain other branches of study, which is
essential to the proper understanding of the Veda. These have been thus
enumerated by Yājñavalkya—‘There are fourteen departments of knowledge
and of Dharma. The four (1-4) Vedas along with (5) Purāṇas, (6) Nyāya,
(7) Mīmāṃsā, (8) Dharma-Śāstra, (9-14) the six ‘Limbs’ or subsidiary
sciences of the Veda.’

Here ‘Nyāya’ stands for the system propounded by Gautama and others,
dealing with such subjects as the means of knowledge and so forth,
‘Mīmāṃsā’ for the system of interpretation propounded by Jaimini and
that of philosophy propounded by Bādarāyaṇa, ‘Dharmaśāstra’ for the
ordinances of Manu and others, and ‘Limbs of the Veda’ for—(*a*)
Phonetics, (*b*) Rituals, (*c*) Grammar, (*d*) Etymology, (*e*) Prosody
and (*f*) Astronomy.

There is a diversity of opinion regarding the lists of recognised
‘Purāṇas’ and ‘Dharmaśāstras,’ as shown above.

*Smṛticandrikā*, p. 5.—‘Purāṇa’—the Brahma and the
rest;—‘Nyāya’—Reasoning; ‘Mīmāṃsā,’ discussion relating to the exact
meaning of Vedic passages;—‘*Dharmaśāstra*,’ the Smṛtis of Manu and
others; and the four Vedas with the six ‘subsidiary sciences’ are the
‘means’ of *knowing* Dharma; and also of *Dharma* itself, through that
knowledge.



### (C) Sadācāra

*Medhātithi on Manu*, 2-6.—‘*Sādhūnām āchāraḥ*,’ ‘Practice of good men’
also has to be construed with ‘*Vedavidām*’ ‘learned in the Veda,’ and
the two qualifications ‘Goodness’ and ‘Vedic learning,’ come under
‘culture.’ When in regard to any action, there are no Vedic or Smṛti
declarations available, but cultured people are found to do it as
‘Dharma,’—something *right*—then that action is to be regarded as
‘enjoined in the Veda’ in the same manner as anything laid down in the
Smṛti. What are meant by ‘practices’ here are such customs as the tying
of the bracelet at marriage, the keeping of an exact number of
hair-locks on the head, the exact manner of receiving guests and so
forth. Each of such practices has to be taken on its own merits; it is
not possible to assume Vedic texts corroborating those ither severally
or even collectively; as the rightness or wrongness of a certain
practice varies with circumstances; *e.g*., a certain cultured man may
be very assiduous in attending upon his guests—never leaving them for a
single moment unattended, and so forth. This may he quite agreeable to
one guest who likes constant attendance; but there may be another to
whom all this close attendance is disagreeable; he would prefer much
rather to be left alone to himself. There is no such variation possible
in regard to what is prescribed in the Smṛti; and herein lies the
difference between what is prescribed in the ‘Smṛti’ and what can be
learnt from the ‘Practices of the cultured.’

*Sarvajñanārāyaṇa on Manu*, 2-0.—In cases where we find no guidance
either from Vedic texts or Smṛti or the *Śīla* of learned men, we have
to be guided by the ‘Ācāra,’ Practice, of ‘*Sādhus*,’ persons engaged in
the performance of acts in accordance with the Veda. ‘Ācāra’ really
stands for the recalling and practising of what has been done by the
good men of the past, *i.e*., *Usage* or *Custom*.—This is regarded as
inferior to ‘*Śīla*’ on account of the possibility of suspicion
regarding the correctness of tradition upon which it is based.

*Kullūka on Manu*, 2-6.—‘*Ācāra*’ stands for the *practice* of dressing
oneself in blankets or tree-bark and so forth.

‘*Sādhūnām*’; of the good, *i.e*., righteous persons.

*Rāghavānanda on Manu*, 2-6.—Such practice as binding of the bracelet at
marriage and so forth, which is current among ‘*Sādhus*,’ *i.e*., people
free from ill feeling.

*Nandana on Manu*, 2-6.—Nandana takes ‘Ācāra’ by itself offering no
remarks about it, and construes ‘*Sādhūnām*’ with ‘*Ātmanastuṣṭi*.’

*Viśvarūpa on Yājña*, 1-7.—‘*Sadāchāra*’ stands for those *religious* or
*spiritual* (as distinguished from temporal or worldly) acts that are
done by such men as are free from selfishness and devoid of hypocrisy
and other defects. This is mentioned apart from ‘*Smṛti*,’ (1) because
there is no compilation of the said practices, as there is of the
ordinances; and (2) the trustworthiness of *practices* is doubtful,
which is not the case with *Smṛti*.

*Aparārka on Yājña*, 1-7.—‘*Sadāchāra*’ is the practice of *cultured*
people, *i.e*., such people as are free from ill-will, vanity, possessed
of sufficient funds (*i.e*., not in want of living), not greedy, free
from hypocrisy, haughtiness, avarice, stupidity and anger; those who
have studied the Veda and its supplements in the right manner, and are
expert in making deductions therefrom (Baudhāyana),—the supplements
being the Itihāsas, Purāṇas, and also Grammar and the other subsidiary
sciences; ‘those expert in making deductions therefrom’ are those versed
in the Smṛtis,—the latter being regarded as *indicative* of the Veda.
When the texts speak of ‘*Sadāchāra*’ as an authority what they refer to
is the fact that the customs obtaining in *Brahmāvarta* and other
civilised lands are all based on the Veda (and not that custom *qua*
custom is to be accepted as in itself authoritative): any custom that is
repugnant to any clear text of the Veda is to be rejected. Vaśiṣṭha’s
declaration that ‘all the customs current in *Āryāvarta* are
authoritative’ means that *most* of them are so; as is clear from
another declaration of his to the effect that customs of the cultured
are to be accepted as authority only on points where no Veda or Smṛti
texts are available.

*Mitākṣarā on Yājña*, 1-7.—‘*Sadāchāra*’—practice of the *cultured*, not
of the *uncultured*.

*Vīramitrodaya on Yājña*, 1-7.—‘*Sadāchāra*’ is thus defined in the
*Viṣṇupurāṇa*: “Good men, free from all defects, are called *Sat*, and
their practice, *Ācaraṇa*, is what is called ‘*Sadāchāra*.’” It is the
sole authority in regard to the *Holākā* and such observances.

*Vīramitrodaya-Paribhāṣā*, pp. 8-29.—Gautama declares that such local,
tribal and family customs as arc repugnant to the scriptures are not
authoritative;—‘Scripture’ here stands for ‘*Veda*, *Smṛti and Purāṇa*.’
This Ācāra stands for positive virtues, as distinguished from ‘*Śīla*’
which stands for the negative ones. If we connect ‘*Sādhūnām*’ with
‘*āchāraḥ*,’ then the meaning comes to be that the practices of even
those not learned in the Veda are to be accepted as authoritative, when
these are men free from all weaknesses and defects; it is in this sense
that in the case of *Śūdraṣ*, the practices of one’s ancestors become an
authoritative source of knowledge of *Dharma*.

*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 100.—‘*Sadāchāra*’—*e.g*., Holākā, Udvṛṣabha and
the like. Those who ‘expound’ or ‘determine’ these are the elders of
each family or tribe.

*Madanapārijāta*, pp. 11-12.—Dharma depends upon ‘Ācāra’—\[But this term
is used here in a very wide sense, being defined as\]—‘Ācāra is the name
of that course of conduct which is enjoined in Śruti and Smṛti and which
is prescribed by the Good.’—This āchāra is to be learnt from persons
born in Madhyadeśa and other countries:—(*a*) the tract of land between
Sarasvatī and Dṛṣadvatī—Brahmāvarta; (*b*) between Himalaya and Vindhya
and between Gaṅgā and Yamunā, West of Prayāga—Madhyadeśa; (*e*) between
Himalaya and Vindhya and the Eastern and Western Oceans—Āryāvarta.

*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda-Saṃskāra*.—“It is difficult to believe that the endless
practices or customs that have grown, and are still growing up from time
to time, should be all based upon Vedic texts. Even Manu’s declaration
cannot be taken as testifying to the authority of each and every custom.
For if their authority rested upon the trustworthy character of the
‘cultured’ persons among whom it is current, then there would be an
interdependence; the people would be ‘cultured’ because they follow
those practices and the practices would be authoritative because they
are followed by those persons. Further, customs and practices are found
to vary in different parts of the country; and certainly all of these
cannot he authoritative.”

It is not each and every practice of the ‘cultured’ that we regard as
authoritative; that alone can be regarded as a trustworthy guide which
is done by the cultured people as ‘Dharma,’ that which they do knowing
it to be ‘righteous.’ And certainly the many misdeeds of well-known
great men that are cited could not have been done by them as ‘*dharma*’;
when the learned regard an act as ‘dharma’ they must do so on the
strength of some Vedic text known to them; hence these Practices and
Customs also must be inferred to have their source in the Veda.

*Smṛticandrikā*, p. 5.—‘Ācāra’ stands for the tying of the bracelet and
such practices.

*Ibid*, p. 6.—The ‘*Śiṣṭaṣ*,’ ‘cultured,’ are defined by Manu (12-109)—

> *dharmeṇādhigato yaistu vedaḥ saparibṛṃhaṇaḥ* \|  
> *te śiṣṭā brāhmaṇā jñeyāḥ śrutipratyakṣahetavaḥ* \|\|

The *paribṛṃhaṇa* of the Veda being the subsidiary sciences, Itihāsa and
Purāṇa. Says Bṛhaspati—

> *itihāsapurāṇābhyāṃ vedaṃ samupabṛṃhayet* \|

\[This occurs in the Mahābhārata also.\]

On questions where we find no Śruti or Smṛti text we are to be guided by
the opinion of the ‘*Pariṣad*,’ ‘Assembly.’ Says Manu (12.108)—

> *amāmnāteṣu dharmeṣu kathaṃ syāditi ced bhavet* \|  
> *yaṃ śiṣṭā brāhmaṇā brūyuḥ sa dharmaḥ syādaśaṅkitaḥ* \|\|

This ‘Assembly’ should consist of at least 10 ‘cultured’ men—as declared
by Gautama—

> *anāmnāte daśāvaraiḥ śiṣṭairūhavadbhiḥ alubdhaiḥ praśastaṃ kāryam* \|

That is, what these people say is ‘good’ should be done. Baudhāyana also
prescribes the same number—

> *daśāvarā pariṣat* \|

Yājñavalkya says—

> *catvāro vedadharmajñāḥ parṣat traividyameva vā* \|  
> *sā brūte yaṃ sa dharmaḥ syādeko vā'dhyātmavittamaḥ* \|\|

by which the Assembly should consist either (1) of four men versed in
the Veda and the Dharmaśāstra, or (2) of those men each versed in three
Vedas, or (3), of only one man who is the best ‘knower of the philosophy
of the Self.’

Manu also (12.110 and 112) fixes the number at (1) *ten* or (2) *three*
of those who are fully learned in the three Vedas.

The opinion of this ‘Assembly’ is as authoritative as the Veda
itself,—says Yama.

Manu (4.178) sanctions the authority of ‘Family Custom’—

> *yenāsya pitaro yātā yena yātāḥ pitāmahāḥ* \|  
> *tena yāyāt satāṃ mārgaṃ tena gacchanna riṣyati* \|\|

But this can be a guide only in matters where the scriptures are found
to he at variance with one another;—as is clear from the words of
Sumantu—

> *yatra śāstragatirbhinnā sarvakarmasu bhārat* \|  
> *tasmin kulakramāyātmācāraṃ tvācared brudhaḥ* \|\|

*Saṃskāramayūkha*, p. 1.—That ‘*Sadāchāra*’ is authoritative which is
not repugnant to *Veda* and *Smṛti* texts.



### (D) Śīla—Samyak-Saṅkalpaja-Kāma (Mentioned in Manu 2-6.)

*Medhātithi on Manu*, 2.6.—Medhātithi takes the two terms ‘*Śīla*’ and
‘*Smṛti*’ as interrelated,—the two together standing for ‘conscientious
recollection’ (see under ‘Smṛti’), so that according to him ‘*Śīla*’ is
not a distinct means of knowing Dharma. He also suggests another
explanation of ‘*Śīla*’ by which it pertains to all acts; the meaning
being that whatever one does one should do with the mind free from all
‘love and hate.’

*Sarvajñanārāyāṇa on Manu*, 2.6.—In cases where neither Vedic nor Smṛti
tests are available one’s duty can be determined on the basis of the
‘*Śīla*’ of a large number of persons learned in the Veda, *i.e*., their
‘natural inclination,’ ‘temperament.’ In support of the authority of
this we have the Vedic text which declares that ‘whatever the learned
man *feels* is to be regarded *saintly*’;—wherever this is not
available, we have to he guided by the ‘*āchāra*,’ practice, of
‘Sādhus.’

*Kullūka on Manu*, 2.6.—‘*Śīla*’ stands for ‘devotion to Brahman’ and
such other qualities enumerated by Hārīta (*ride* above). According to
Govindarāja however it stands for ‘freedom from love and hate.’

*Rāghavānanda on Manu*, 2.6.—‘*Śīla*’ is conduct, action, of those
learned in the Veda, *i.e*., those who know that the injunctions
contained in the Veda are to he acted up to; or it may stand for the
thirteen qualities spoken of by Hārīta (see above).

*Nandana on Manu*, 2.6.—Nandana defines it as ‘that excellent quality of
the soul which makes a man respected among the wise,’ as defined in the
Mahābhārata; as an example is cited that magnanimity which was shown by
Yudhiṣṭhira when he asked for the life of his stepbrother Nakula before
that of his brother Bhīma and Arjuna, when all of them had been devoured
by the alligator.

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.7.—speaks of *Samyakṣaṅkalpajaḥ kāmaḥ*, determination
or judgment after full reflection.

*Aparārka on Yājña*, 1-7.—This means ‘that desire to act in a certain
way which arises from rightful volition,’ *i.e*., the determination to
attain a certain object by a definite means in accordance with the
Scriptures.

According to *Viśvarūpa* this helps only in determining one out of a
number of optional alternatives.

*Vīramitrodaya on Yājña*, 1-7.—‘Samyakṣaṅkalpa’ is such volition as is
free from love, hatred and such aberrations. ‘*Kāma*’, a well-considered
vow. Or this may be the same as what Manu has called ‘*Śīla*,’ which has
been described in the *Mahābhārata* as consisting in knowledge and
sympathy, in thought, word and act, towards all living beings;—this is
called a ‘source of Dharma’ in the sense that it is helpful in the man
possessed of this quality being better able to understand what is said
in the Veda. Hārīta has described ‘Śīla’ as consisting in the following
ten qualities:—‘Devotion to Brāhmaṇas, Gods and Pitṛs, sympathy, freedom
from jealousy, kindly disposition, friendliness, sweet words, mercy and
calmness.’ This is to be accepted as authoritative only in regard to
those cases of doing (such acts as the helping of a Brāhmaṇa) which are
not covered by the Vedic injunctions bearing on the subject. According
to others, however, it is the authority in regard to such determinations
as ‘I shall not drink water except with food.’

*Another interpretation of the whole verse* .—‘ *Samyak*’ qualifies
‘*Śruti*,’ and means ‘duly understood’; and it also qualifies ‘*Smṛti*,’
where it means ‘based upon the Veda’;—

‘*Svasya*’ is to be taken by itself and construed with ‘*āchāraḥ*’ the
meaning being ‘the practice or custom of *one’s own*
ancestors’:—‘*priyam ātmanaḥ*’ means ‘self-satisfaction’;
‘*Samyakṣaṅkalpajaḥ kāmaḥ*’ means the desire to act in a certain way
after *proper reflection*; this would vary with different individuals;
some men would be satisfied with the mere assertion of a trustworthy
person,while others would want corroborative texts.

*Mitākṣarā on Yājña*, 1.7.—Such desire as is not repugnant to the
scriptures, *e.g*., in such cases as the determination not to drink
water except with food.

*Vīramitrodaya-Paribhāṣā*, p. 10.—This means a ‘well-considered vow’
such as ‘I shall not drink water except with food’; or it may stand for
the ‘desire to do good and so forth which arises from a proper, *i.e*.,
philanthropic, determination’; in this sense it stands for the same
thing as the ‘*Śīla*’ in Manu’s text.

*Vīramitrodaya-Paribhāṣā*, pp. 8-25.—The term ‘*Śīla*’ stands for the
thirteen qualities enumerated by *Hārīta*. It stands, it will be seen,
for the negative virtues, and is as such distinguished from ‘Ācāra,’
practice or custom, which stands for the positive ones.

On Yājña. 1.7 the Vīramitrodaya identifies the *Śīla* of Manu with the
‘Samyakṣaṅkalpajakāma’ of Yājñavalkya.

*Smṛticandrikā*, p. 5.—‘*Śīla*’ connotes freedom from love, hatred and
so forth.



### (E) Ātmanastuṣṭi—Svasya Priyam

*Medhātithi on Manu*, 2.6.—This ‘self-satisfaction’ is meant to be of
those only who are ‘learned in the Veda and good’ (‘*Vedavidām
sādhūnām*’), the idea of this being that the ‘source of Dharma’ is based
upon the trustworthy character of the persons concerned. When the
‘learned and good’ feel satisfied regarding the righteousness of a
certain action, that action must be accepted as right; because such men
can never feel satisfied with anything that is *wrong*. The older
treatises however have explained the meaning to be that in oases of
optional alternatives that alternative should be adopted in regard to
which the man’s own mind feels satisfied. There is yet another
explanation by which what is meant is that ‘whenever one is doing
anything he should keep his mind tranquil and calm’ and in this sense
like ‘*Śīla*,’ ‘freedom from love and hate,’ this ‘self-satisfaction’
also pertains to ‘*all acts*.’

*Sarvajñanārāyaṇa on Manu*, 2.6.—In cases where we have no other means
of ascertaining the right course of action, we are to he guided by
‘self-satisfaction’; *i.e*., we should do that the doing of which makes
us feel easy at heart and satisfies the conscience. This is inferior to
‘*Śīla*’ and ‘*Ācāra*’ as it pertains to the mind of a single individual
and hence is lacking in that corroboration by others which is available
in the case of the other two.

*Kullūka on Manu*, 2.6.—‘Self-satisfaction’ is authoritative only in
regard to the choice of alternatives.

*Nandana on Manu*, 2.6.—Nandana construes this with

‘*Sādhūnām*,’ by which explanation the meaning is that the
self-satisfaction of exceptionally righteous persons is to be regarded
as trustworthy.

*Viśvarūpa on Yājña*, 1.7.—‘Self-satisfaction’ meant here is such as is
not incompatible with Vedic texts, and is not due to restlessness;—the
taking to renunciation, for instance, during a time when the family is
in trouble, would not be ‘lawful,’ even though one may feel
self-satisfaction in it......‘*Svasya ca priyam ātmanaḥ*’ may also mean
‘Liberation.’

*Mitākṣarā on Yājña*, 1.7.—‘Self-satisfaction’ serves to determine which
one of several sanctioned alternatives has to be adopted, *e.g*., the
performance of Upanayan in the 7th or the 8th year.

*Aparārka on Yājña*, 1.7.—It is that which brings satisfaction to one’s
own mind. This is to be accepted as authority only in regard to cases
that are distinctly declared to be subject to such authority, in such
texts as ‘when one feels that there is a load in his mind until a
certain act is done, that act he shall do.’

*Vīramitrodaya on Yājña*, 1.7.—‘*Svasya priyam*’ means
‘self-satisfaction’; *i.e*., the satisfaction regarding the propriety of
a certain act, in the mind of such men as arc steeped in Vedic
tradition. This same idea is expressed by Bhaṭṭa Kumārila in the verse
*etena vaidikāneka* ‘Trustworthiness belongs to the self-satisfaction of
such persons as have their minds steeped in the moral grandeur of the
Veda.’ This ‘self-satisfaction’ must be that of the enquirer himself,
and he cannot go about seeking for that of all Vedic scholars. This is
the sole authority in regard to such questions as to whether or not the
performance of the expiation of a certain sin shall be repeated; this
having been declared by Bṛhaspati:—‘One should go, on doing an act until
his mind becomes *lightened*,’—*i.e*., free from the incubus of the
sinful act committed. Others, however, have held that
‘self-satisfaction’ is what determines which of the several equally
authoritative alternative courses of action one shall adopt.

*Vīramitrodaya-Paribhāṣā*, pp. 8-25.—‘*Sādhūnām*’ in Manu has to be
construed with ‘*tuṣṭiḥ*’; the sense being that when there is a doubt as
to what is ‘right,’ that course of action is to be accepted as ‘right’
with regard to which there is satisfaction among ‘good men,’ *i.e*., men
whose minds are steeped in Vedic lore. Such is the explanation given by
the *Kalpataru*; this view has the support also of a Taittirīya text,
which says—‘When there are doubts regarding what is *right*, one should
act in the manner that those Brāhmaṇas act who are impartial, judicious,
trustworthy and highly righteous.’ This implies the authority also of
the *Pariṣad*, ‘Council’ or ‘Assembly.’ This ‘self-satisfaction’ is
authoritative only in the determining of one out of a number of optional
alternatives, and there too it is authority only for the man himself;
and the ‘self-satisfaction’ of one man can have no authority for
another.

*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda-Saṃskāra* - *M* *S*.—Mere self-satisfaction is not
authoritative. What is meant is that when a cultured and learned man
feels *satisfied* that a certain course of action is *righteous*, that
satisfaction itself is to be regarded as a trustworthy guide.

*Smṛticandrikā*, p. 5.—This is authority only in determining one of
several optional alternatives.



### Comparative Authority

*Manu*, 2.10.—‘The Veda is to be known as *Śruti*, R evealed Word, and
the *Dharmaśāstra*, Legal Ordinances, as *Smṛti*; in all matters these
two do not deserve to be criticised.’

According to Medhātithi, ‘Custom’ also is included under ‘*Smṛti*’ here.
Kullūka does not accept this view; according to him the text puts the
*Smṛti* distinctly above *Custom*, which means that *Custom* contrary to
Smṛti is to he rejected.

Manu (2.14) says—‘Whenever there is conflict between two Vedic texts,
both are to be regarded as lawful’; the same with two Smṛti texts, adds
Medhātithi; *i.e*., the two courses of action laid down by the
conflicting texts are to be treated as optional alternatives.

*Viśvarūpa on yājñavalkya*, 1.7.—According to Manu, in all purely
spiritual matters the Veda is the highest authority; the Smṛti-writers
themselves regard the authority of the Smṛti as extremely weak in
comparison with that of the *Śruti*; all which leads to the conclusion
that when *Smṛti* conflicts with *Śruti*, it is to he rejected.

*Aparārka on Yājña*, 1.7.—In the determining of Dharma, says Vyāsa, the
Veda is the only pure source of knowledge, ‘pure,’ *i*. *e*., whose
authority is beyond suspicion;—all the rest are ‘mixed’—*i. e*., their
authority is open to doubt. Hence that is the *highest* Dharma which is
learnt from the Veda; what is declared in the Purāṇa anil other works is
the *lower* Dharma. All other works of human origin are to be rejected
in the matter of Dharma. Vaśiṣṭha says that “Dharma is that which is
prescribed by Śruti and Smṛti; and it is in the absence of these that
the ‘Practice of the Cultured’ is to be accepted as authoritative.”

*Saṃskāramayūkha*, p. 1.—

The order is

1.  Śruti,
2.  Smṛti,
3.  Sadācāra,
4.  Svasya Priyam,
5.  Samyakṣaṅkalpaja-kāma.

Among Smṛtis Manu is most authoritative, as says
Aṅgiras—*manvarthaviparītā tu yā smṛtiḥ sā na śasyate* (*i.e*., not to
be honoured). Also the Veda itself—*yad vai manuravadat tad bheṣajam* \|

*Smṛticandrikā*, pp. 15-17.—Says Manu (2.14)—*tu yatra syāt tatra
dharmāvabhau smṛtau*, *i.e*., where two *Śruti* texts are mutually
contradictory, both are right; *i.e*., the two courses laid down are to
be treated as optional alternatives. The same rule applies to cases of
conflict between two *Smṛti* texts; says Gautama *tustyabalavirodhe
vikalpaḥ*.—When there is conflict between Śruti and Smṛti the latter is
to be rejected; so also when Custom conflicts with Smṛti, the former is
rejected, as is clear from Vaśiṣṭha’s words—*śrutismṛtivihito dharmaḥ
tadabhāve śiṣṭācāraḥ pramāṇam*. The same applies to the opinion of the
Assembly also. When there is conflict between Manu and another *Smṛti*,
the former is to be accepted; as says Aṅgiras:—

> *yat pūrvaṃ manunā proktaṃ dharmaśāstramanuttamam* \|  
> *na hi tat samatikrasya vacanaṃ hitamātmanaḥ* \|\|

Also Bṛhaspati—

> *vedā(du\|rtho)panibaddhatvāt prādhānyaṃ tu manoḥ smṛtaṃ* \|

In cases where the same act is prescribed in equally authoritative texts
in two different forms, we have to accept the more elaborate of the two
and reject the simpler.

*Vīramitrodaya-Paribhāṣā*, pp. 25-29.—When there is a conflict between
two Vedic texts, both are to be regarded as equally authoritative, and
in actual practice the two courses of action are to be treated as
optional alternatives. Similarly when there is a conflict between two
Smṛti texts or between two ‘customs.’ When there is conflict between a
Vedic text and a Smṛti text, preference is to he given to the former as
possessed of inherent authority, while the latter owes its authority to
an assumed Vedic text. When there is a conflict between a Smṛti text and
a Custom, the Smṛti is to he regarded as the more authoritative; *e.g*.,
the custom of the marrying of the maternal uncle’s daughter cannot he
accepted as authoritative when it is found to be in conflict with the
distinct Smṛti text forbidding that practice.

There is a further distinction among authorities of the same class also.
For instance, between two Vedic texts, if one is of doubtful import
while the meaning of the other is clear, then the latter is to be given
preference. If one treats of a more important matter than the other, it
is to be given preference; *e.g*., if one deals with something to be
done, while the other, with a minor detail of the act, the former is to
set aside the latter. What occurs in the opening sentence sets aside
what occurs in the concluding sentence; *e.g*., the opening sentence
speaks of the ‘three Vedas,’ and the concluding sentence speaks of the
‘Ṛk Verse’ as to he recited ‘loudly,’ the signification of the word ‘Ṛk’
in the latter is sublated by that of the word ‘Veda’in the former, and
the ‘loudness’ becomes connected with the *three Vedas*, and not with
the Mantras of the Ṛk Veda only. If what is said in one text is beset
with more difficulties than what occurs in another, then the former is
to be rejected; *e.g*., one text lays down that a man who accepts the
gift of horses should perform as many sacrifices as the horses he
receives; while another speaks of Prajāpati having given a horse to
Varuṇa and performed a sacrifice to this deity—by which the *giver* and
not the *receiver*, is to perform the sacrifice;—now if we accept the
former, *i.e*., if we accept the view that the sacrifice is to be
performed by the *receiver* of the gift, then we shall have the
following difficulties in the construing of the latter text: (1) it will
be necessary to take the Dative in ‘*Varuṇāya*’ (‘*to* Varuṇa’) as
standing for the Ablative (‘*from* Varuṇa’), and (2) to take the verb
‘given’ as standing for ‘accepted’; while on the other hand, if we
accept the latter text, according to which the sacrifice is to be
performed by the giver of the horse, then the only difficulty involved
in the construing of the former text is to take the verb ‘accept’ as
standing for ‘give’; and hence it is the former text that is rejected,
and the conclusion is that the *giver* of a horse is to perform
sacrifices. Where one thing is enjoined in connection with a particular
Veda, this is given preference over what would apply to that same, in
accordance with what has been prescribed in connection with another
Veda; *e.g*., in connection with the Yajurveda we have the injunction
that its Mantras are to be recited *in an undertone*; in accordance with
this rule one may be led to think that the chanting of the *Vāravantīya*
(Sāma-hymn) is to be done in an undertone; but this is precluded by the
‘high pitch’ that has been enjoined in connection with the chanting of
the mantras of the Sāma-Veda. What is enjoined in regard to the
particular ‘Vedic Recensional School’ to which the performer’s family
belongs is given preference over what may have been enjoined in
connection with another school. The general law is superseded by the
particular, and so on.

In the case of Smṛtis also,—the ‘orthodox’ Smṛti sets aside the
‘heterodox,’—among the ‘orthodox’ Smṛtis also, if a certain course of
action is sanctioned by one, hut condemned by another, the latter sets
aside the former, and the action in question is to he avoided. What is
laid down in reference to imperceptible transcendental effects sets
aside what is enjoined for temporal or worldly ends; *e.g*., the law
prohibiting the killing of the Brāhmaṇa sets aside the law that ‘one may
kill a person who is threatening to kill,’ as the latter course of
action is meant only to serve the perceptible purpose of saving one’s
life.. The Smṛti that is based upon a Vedic *Arthavāda* is set aside by
that which is based upon a Vedic injunction; *e.g*., the law sanctioning
the killing of the cow in honour of an honoured guest,—being based upon
an *Arthavāda* passage commendatory of the ‘churning’ or ‘rubbing’ of
sticks,—is set aside by that which prohibits the said killing,—this
latter being based upon the Vedic injunctive passage—‘Kill not Aditi,
the hornless cow.’

Among ‘Custom,’ ‘self-satisfaction’ and ‘well considered vow,’—the
preceding is more authoritative than the following; as declared by the
*Mitākṣarā*.

In some cases what is sanctioned by higher authority is rejected by what
is said by a lower authority; *e.g*., the drinking of wine (at the
*Sautrāmaṇi* sacrifice), even though enjoined by the *Veda*, is not
considered right, in view of its prohibition during *Kali* - *Yuga*
contained in the *Smṛti*.

Any *Smṛti* that goes against the ordinances of Manu is to be
rejected—as declared by *Bṛhaspati* (see above). This is the view of the
*Kalpataru* also.—Customs, local, tribal as well as family, are to be
rejected if repugnant to the Veda or the Smṛti or the Purāṇa.

As between *Śruti* and *Smṛti*, the conclusion arrived at is thus
expressed by Vyāsa:—‘That law which is deduced from the Veda is the
*higher*, while that declared in the Purāṇa and other Smṛtis is the
*lower*; which means that in cases of conflict our first duty is to do
what is laid down in the Veda, and the doing of what is declared in the
Smṛti can be justified only as a substitute, *i.e*., to be adopted only
when there is no possibility of the other being adopted. And this for
the simple reason that according to Manu (11.30), if one follows the
‘second best’ course when the best course is possible, his action
becomes futile; so that tho conclusion indicated by this is that even in
cases of conflict tho *Smṛti* does not entirely lose its authoritative
character; all that happens is that the course of action sanctioned by
it is rendered fruitless by reason of the superiority of authority
attaching to the *Vedic* text to the contrary.

The variability of the Law is unfeignedly declared by Parāśara in 1.22:—

‘The Law or the Right is one in the *Kṛta* Cycle, different in the
*Tretā* Cycle, yet different in the *Dvāpara* Cycle, and yet different
in the *Kali* Cycle,—varying as it does with the character of the
Time-Cycles.’

On this Mādhava makes the following observations:—

The ‘difference’ spoken of here is, not of the *nature* or *essence*, of
the Law or Right, but of its *modes*. If it were the former, then it
would imply a corresponding diversity in the *Veda* also, as the source
of that Law; while as a matter of fact, the Veda does *not* vary with
the time-cycles. As regards the *modes* however, we have several
instances of diversity; for instance, though the act of the *Agnihotra-*
offering itself is the same, yet there is diversity in regard to the
*mode* of performing it according as it is performed in the morning or
in the evening. For instance, at the evening-performance the sprinkling
is to be done with the *mantra ‘Ṛtantva satyena pariṣiñchāmi*,’ while
that at the morning-performance with the *mantra* ‘*Satyantva ṛtena
pariṣiñchāmi*.’ Thus in the present instance also, the variation lies in
the *mode* of doing what is ‘right,’ and not in what *is* ‘right’
itself; the variations being due to the nature of the time-cycle and of
the capacity of the man doing the acts. This matter has been fully
discussed in the Mīmāṃsā-Sūtra VI.3, where the conclusion arrived at is
that in the case of the *Agnihotra* and such other obligatory rites,
only those prescribed details have to be performed which it is within
the capacity of the performer to perform. Baudhāyana also has declared
that the obligatory acts are to be performed to the extent that one can;
they should, on no account, be entirely omitted.

The most important instance of variation is cited by Parāśara (1.23)
himself—“In the *Kṛta* Cycle, *Austerity* is the highest *Dharma* or
Duty;—in the *Tretā, Learning*;—in the *Dvāpara, Sacrifice*,—and in the
*Kali, Charity*.” To the last Bṛhaspati adds ‘sympathy and
self-control.’

There is variation, according to Parāśara (1.24), not only in Law, but
also in the authority:—‘Duringthe *Kṛa*, the Laws are those ordained by
*Manu*,—during the *Tretā*, those ordained by *Gautama*,—during the
*Dvāpara*, those ordained by *Śaṅkha-Likhita*,—and during the *Kali*,
those ordained by *Parāśara*.’ This distinction however has never been
observed in actual practice, as even up to the present time, the work of
Manu holds the highest position among the Smṛtis.



### Conclusion

From the above we conclude that all the authorities are agreed on the
following points—(*a*) The Veda is the first and paramount authority,
(*b*) The Smṛti is authoritative only in so far as it is not repugnant
to the Veda, to which it owes its authority; but only on matters on
which we have no paramount authority, (*c*) Practices or Customs are
trustworthy guides, only as they are current among the ‘cultured,’ and
then too only those that are not repugnant to Vedic or Smṛti texts.
(*d*) The same with regard to Tribal or Family Customs. (*e*) The
judgment of the ‘Assembly’ of the learned is to be accepted as
authoritative only when it is not repugnant to the Veda, and only when
tho judgment is ‘unbiased’ by improper feelings. There is not a single
text, or ‘explanation,’ which favours the opinion that Custom is to
override original texts,—an opinion that has been upheld by the Privy
Council, and endorsed by eminent writers on Anglo-Hindu Law. Neither
Vijñāneśvara (*Mitākṣarā*) nor Jīmūtavāhana (*Dharmaratna*) nor
Nīlakaṇṭha (*Mayūkha*) countenances any such view; and these three are
regarded by our lawyers as the founders of the principal ‘Schools of
Law.’
