+++
title = "018 तस्मिन् देशे"

+++
**(Verses 18-23)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha*, 1.7-12.—‘Aryāvarta is the country which is to the East of
the *spot of* disappearance, to the West of Kālakavana, to the North of
Pāriyātra and the Vindhya and to the South of the Himālaya. The Dharma
and practices prevalent in this country should be accepted in all
places. Some people apply the name *Āryāvarta* to the land between the
Gaṅgā and the Yamunā. Brahmanic glory is coterminous with the tract over
which the black antelope roams.

*Vaśiṣṭha*, 15.9-14.—‘The Dharmas and Ācāras prevalent in that country
should be accepted everywhere. The others are of contrary Dharma. Some
people restrict Dharma to the country lying between the Gaṅgā and the
Yamunā. Others again state that Brahmanic glory extends all over that
tract of land over which the black deer roams. The limits of this tract
are hounded on the west by the river Sindhu and on other sides by the
Vaitariṇī river (in Mālwā, according to Vīramitrodaya, Paribhāṣa, p.
57); and by the spot where the sun rises.’ *Vyāsa*, 1.3.—‘The Vedic
dharma can prevail only in that country over which the black deer roams
naturally.’

*Samvarta*, 4.—‘That country where the black deer constantly roams at
will is to be known as *Dharma-deśa*, where alone the duties of the
twice-born can be performed.’

*Baudhāyana*, 1.25.25.—‘To the East of the spot of disappearance (of the
Sarasvatī river), to the West of the Kālakavana, to the North of
Pāriyātra and to the South of Himālaya,—this is Āryāvarta; it is the
*Sadāchāra* of this country that is authoritative; according to some
people it is the tract included between the Gaṅgā and the Yamunā.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīra-Pari.,p. 57).—‘That country is noble which lies
to the East of the mountain where the Sun sets, to the West of that
where the Sun rises, which is interspersed with high mountains and
sacred rivers; this is the *sacred land*; or the land where the black
antelope roams, or that to the East of the Sindhu and the Sauvīra, to
the West of Kāmpilya, to the North of the Pāriyātra and to the South of
the Himalaya,—here Brahmanic glory is complete.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (*ibid*).—‘From Himālaya to the Kumārī (Cape Comorin), from
the Sindhu and the Vaitariṇī and to the place where the sun rises, or
where the black antelope roams,—over this land alone is Dharma present
in its complete form.’

*Viṣṇu*, 74.4.—‘That country where there is no differentiation of the
four castes should be known as the *mleccha deśa*; other than this is
Āryāvarta.’
