+++
title = "024 एताण् द्विजातयो"

+++
*Baudhāyana*, 1-30.—‘Āraṭṭa, Kāraskara, Puṇḍraka, Sauvīra, Baṅga,
Kaliṅga, Prāsūna,—if one goes to those countries, he should perform the
expiatory rite of either Punaḥstoma or Sarvapṛṣṭhā.

*Baudhāyana*.—‘Anantaka (Dvārakā), Aṅga, Magadha, Surāṣṭra, Dakṣiṇāpatha
Upāvṛt, Sindhu, Sauvīra, these countries are of *mixed origin*.’

*Ādipurāṇa* (Vīra-Pari., p. 59).—‘A person horn in Āryāvarta either
twice-born or not, should never cross the Karmāda (Karmanāśā), the
Sindhu or the Karatoyā. The twice-born person should never go beyond
Āryāvarta except on pilgrimage, or in obedience to the order of his
parents.’ In Magadha, the sacred places of pilgrimage are Gaya, the
river Poonpoon; the Hermitage of Chyavana and the forest of Rājagṛha.’

*Vāyu-purāṇa* (*Ibid*).—‘Kāñchī, Kośala, Saurāṣṭra, Karṇāṭa, Kacheha,
Kāverī, Kolvaṇa (land near the Tryambaka Hill, near Nāsik),—these tracts
are not commended. That tract of land over which the five rivers
(Śatadru, Vipāśā, Airāvaiī, Chandrabhāgā and Vitastā) flow is called
*Āraṭṭa*; the Ārya should not permanently dwell in this country. One who
crosses the Narmadā, the Sindhu aud the Kosi, or goes to the West of
Puṣkara, and lives there beyond the time of pilgrimage, goes to
hell.—Aṅga, Baṅga, Kaliṅga, Andhra, Madra, Mālavika, tract to the South
of the Narmadā or to the North of the Sindhu, Pauṇḍra, Surāṣṭra,
Vaindhya, Māgadhaka, Khaśa,—these are all sinful tracts.’

*Vāyu-purāṇa (Ibid*).—‘The country bounded on the South by the Mahānadī,
and on the North by Magadha is the *country of Triśaṅku*, with an area
of 48 square miles; this country should be avoided.’

*Vāyu-purāṇa* (*Ibid*, p. 57).—‘Wise men should take shelter in that
country where there is prosperity due to the black antelope, barley,
grass, the four castes and the four life-stages.’

*Skanda-purāṇa* (Vira-Pari., p. GO).—‘Aṅga, Baṅga, Kaliṅga, Parvata,
Khaśa, Sindhu, Sauvīra, Saurāṣṭra, Pārada, Andhra, Mālava,—these the
twice-born should avoid. But when pressed for livelihood, the
Householder may betake himself to these countries.’

*Bhaviṣya purāṇa* (Do., p. 55).—Brahmāvarta is the best country; less
than that is the Ṛṣideśa; less than this latter is the Madhyadeśa; next
to that comes the Āryāvarta.’

*Chāndogya Upaniṣad* (quoted in Vīra-Paribhāṣā, p. 60).—‘One shall not
approach the Caṇḍāla, nor the inferior country.’

*Pitāmaha* (Do., p. 60).—‘One may reside even in the kingdom of the
Śūdra, if the Gaṅgā flows through it: even though that country may he
inhabited by uncultured people, yet it is a sacred land.

*Vyāsa* (Do., p. 61).—‘Those places, those countries, those mountains
and those hermitages are sacred through which the best of rivers, the
Gaṅgā, flows.’

*Viṣṇudharmottara* (Do.).—‘The righteous man should reside at Prabhāsa,
at Puṣkara, at Kāśī, at Naimiṣa, at Amarakaṇṭaka, on the Gaṅgā or on the
Sarayū.’
