+++
title = "029 प्राङ् नाभिवर्धनात्"

+++
*Mahābhārata* (Ājagara Parva., 3?).—(The first line of Manu repeated.)

*Viṣṇu* (Smṛti, 1.27.1).—‘On the birth of the child, the Jātakarma.’

*Āśvalāyana* (Gṛhyasūtrā, 15.1.3).—‘When the boy is born, before he has
been touched by any other person, he should be made to eat, with a
golden spoon, butter, honey and gold, with the mantra—‘*Pra te*
*dadhāmi*, *etc*.’—‘The following mantra is to he recited into the ear
of the child —*medhānte devaḥ savitā*, *etc*.’—‘The shoulders are
touched with the mantra —*Aśmā bhava*’, etc.

*Āṣhvalāyana* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 193).—‘The Jātakarma should be
performed by the twice-born immediately on the birth of the child.’

*Gobhila* (Gṛhyasūtrā, 2.7.21).—‘Taking hold of the boy as soon as he is
born, one should make an offering into his mouth, with the mantra
*Medhānte mitrāvaruṇau, etc*.’

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 191).—‘When the boy is born, the Father
should perform the Jātakarma sacrament after having performed the
*Nāndī-śrāddha*.’

*Jābāli* (*Ibid*).—‘Before the umbilical cord has been cut, the Śrāddha
consequent on child-birth should be performed.’

*Garga* (*Ibid*).—‘The Jātakarma is prescribed as to be performed, as
soon as the boy is born, before he is put to the mother’s breast, or
before the umbilical cord has been cut.’

*Śaṅkha* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 110).—‘To all members of his family he
shall give quadrupeds, grains, gold and other things.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (*Ibid*).—‘On. birth, there is Jātakarma; and feeding
of the child with barley-dour, honey, butter, by means of a golden
spoon.’

*Baijavāpa* (*Ibid*).—‘As soon as the boy is born, before the cutting of
the cord, he should be fed with water touched with gold, and also with
curd, honey, butter.’

*Viṣṇudarmottara* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 440).—‘On the birth of the son,
the Śrāddha should be performed before the cutting of the umbilical
cord; or after the expiry of the period of impurity.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.)—‘When the man is away from home, or when his wife is in
her courses, when he has no materials nor Brāh-niaṇas at hand, lie shall
perform the Birth-śrāddha with gold.’

*Samvārta* (Paraśaramādhava, p. 439).—‘On the birth of the son, bathing
with clothes on has been prescribed for the father.’

*Ādityapurāṇa* (*Ibid*, p. 410).—‘At the Birth-śrāddha one shall not
offer cooked food to the Brāhmaṇas.’

*Pāraskara* (*Ibid*, p. 440).—‘When the boy is horn, before the cord is
cut, one should perform rites tending to longevity and intelligence;
uttering into his right ear, the word ‘*Vāk*’ and then his secret name.’

*Brahmapurūṇa* (Aparārka, p. 20) and *Ādityapurāṇa*, (Parāśaramādhava,
p. 440).—‘Gods and Pitṛs come to the house of the twice-born whenever a
son is born; therefore on that occasion, sacred rites should be
performed; one should give away gold, land, cows and chariots,
umbrellas, goats, garlands, sesamum, houses and much wealth, and after
performing the śrāddha, he should offer cooked food to Brāhmaṇas.’

*Hārīta* (Do.)—‘On the birth of the son, the Pitṛs become delighted;
hence that day is sacred; hence one should give away vessels full of
sesamum, along with gold; and having invited Brāhmaṇas, one should make
offerings to the Pitṛs; and prior to the cutting of the umbilical cord,
they make
