+++
title = "030 नामधेयन् दशम्याम्"

+++
*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 27.5.—‘The naming should be done after the lapse of the
period of impurity.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.12.—‘The naming on the eleventh day.’ *Āśvalāyana*
(Gṛhyasūtrā, 1.4).—‘They should give him a name.’

*Pāraskara* (Gṛhyasūtrā, 1.17.11).—‘On the tenth day, the father should
take him up, and after having fed the Brāhmaṇas, should perform the
naming ceremony.’

*Gobhila* (Gṛhyasūtrā, 2.7.7).—‘On the expiry of ten days, or hundred
days, or a year, after birth, the Naming.’

*Jyotirvaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 231).—‘The naming of the
boy should be done either on the day of birth, or on the twelfth day, or
in special cases, on the tenth day.’

*Maheśvara (Ibid*).—‘The Jātakarma and the naming of the boy should he
done either by the father or brothers at the time of birth; or on the
twelfth day from birth, or on the first day.’

\[The *naming* on the day of birth refers to the imparting of a secret
name, which is done along with the Jātakarma; see above.\]

*Viṣṇu-purāṇa (Ibid*).—‘The father should do the naming on the tenth
day.’

*Vyāsa (Ibid*).—‘Some wise men hold that the naming is to be done on the
tenth day; others mention the twelfth day; and yet others hold that it
should be done after the lapse of one full month.’

*Nārada* (Do.)—‘From the birth, on the tenth day, or the twelfth day, is
performed the naming of Brāhmaṇas; of the other two castes, it is on the
expiry of the period of impurity;—so also for Śūdras; hut some people
hold that the naming of the Śūdra should be done on the thirty-first
day.’

*Śaṅkha* (Do.)—‘The naming has been prescribed as to be done on the
lapse of the period of impurity.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Do.)—‘The naming is prescribed as to be done on the tenth or
the twelfth dav.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.)—‘The naming should he done, for the Brāhmaṇa, on the
tenth or tho twelfth day; for the Kṣatriya on the thirteenth day; for
the Vaiśya on the sixteenth day; and for the Śūdra either on the
nineteenth (v. l. twentieth) or the thirty-second (v. l. twenty-second)
day.’

*Mahābhārata* (Do.)—‘The naming of the twice-born castes should be done
on the twelfth, the sixteenth, the twentieth and the twenty-second day
respectively; for the Brāhmaṇa it may be done on the tenth also.’

*Bhaviṣyapurāṇa* (Do.)—‘On the expiry of the twelfth night, or,
according to others, on the expiry of one month, or, according to
others, on the eighteenth day.’

\[Thus we find that the choice lies among the following days—the day of
birth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, sixteenth, eighteenth,
nineteenth, twenty-second, thirty-first, hundred and first and the end
of a year.\]

As regards the ‘*puṇya tithi, muhūrta* and *nakṣatra*’ the reader is
referred to the Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, pp. 234-237.
