+++
title = "035 चूडाकर्म द्विजातीनाम्"

+++
*Viṣṇu*, 27.12.—‘Tonsure is performed in the third year.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.12.—‘Tonsure is to be performed according to
family-custom.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1.17.1.—‘Tonsure in the third year; or in
accordance with the custom of the family.’

*Pāraskara- Gṛhyasūtrā*, 2.1.2.—‘The performance of Ton-sure for the
one-year-old child: or during the third year.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1.9.1.—‘The performance of Tonsure in the third
year.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 296).—‘The performance of Tonsure
has been prescribed for all castes; by Tonsure is the life-span
enhanced, by Tonsure is it reduced. It should be performed during the
third or the fifth year, or according to the practice obtaining in the
family. It may be performed also during the seventh year from either
birth or the taking of the Fires.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 996).—‘Before the completion of the
year, Tonsure should be performed; or during the second or the third
year.’

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 297).—‘Tonsure is recommended
during the third or the fifth year; or even earlier, but during the odd
year, or during the sixth year; or along with the Upanayana.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 296).—‘Counting either from
conception or from Birth,—during the fifth or the seventh year should be
performed for the male as well as the female child.’

*Nārada* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 996).—‘The learned recommend the
third vear from Birth as the best; the fifth and the seventh years from
Birth are to be regarded as mediocre and the worst time would he the
tenth or the eleventh year from Birth.—The Tonsure of children should he
performed either, before the end of the first year, or in the third or
fifth year, or according to the family-custom.’

*Atri* (Do., p. 298).—‘Tonsure during the third year is conducive to the
fulfilment of all desires; that during the first year is conducive to
longevity and Brāhmic glory; that during the fifth year leads to the
acquisition of cattle; during the even years, it is to be deprecated.’

*Nṛsiṃha* (Do.).—‘Tonsure is to be performed during either the first or
the third or the fifth year; after the lapse of the third part of the
year.’

*Laugākṣi* (Do., p. 299).—‘Tonsure should be performed during the third
year, after the lapse of its third part.’

\[The upshot of the whole is that Tonsure may he performed during any of
the following years—1st, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 10th, 11th,—or on the
Upanayana-day;—or according to the custom prevailing in the family.\]

\[The form in which the Tonsure is to be performed, the shape that is to
be given to the hair on the head, the keeping of the *Śikhā*,—all this
is described in detail in the Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 315.\]

*Baijavāpa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 413).—‘Tonsure during the third year.’

*Śaṅkha* (Do.).—‘Tonsure during the third or the fifth vear.’

*Śaunaka* (Do.).—‘Tonsure during the third year, or according to the
family-custom.’

*Lokākṣi* (Do.).—‘For those belonging to the Vaśiṣṭha Gotra, the tuft is
towards the right, for those of Atri or Kāś-yapa, on both sides; for
those of Bhṛgu, it should be all shaven; for those of Aṅgiras, there are
five tufts; others have the tuft in the form of a semi-circle.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Aparārka, p. 29).—‘Tonsure during the third or the
fifth year.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.).—\[Lays down the auspicious days, etc.\]
