+++
title = "036 गर्भाष्टमे ऽब्दे"

+++
*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1-7, 8, 13.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the Upanayana
daring the eighth year;—for the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya, during the
eleventh and twelfth years, respectively.’

*Gautama* (Aparārka, p. 32).—‘*Initiation* during the eighth, fifth or
ninth year; the eighth year from conception is the time fixed for all,
the ninth or the fifth only for those with distinct motives.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 2.8-10.—‘The years in this connection being
computed from conception,—the Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa should be
performed during the eighth year;—three years after the eighth, of the
Kṣatriya;—and after one more year, of the Vaiśya.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 11.44.—‘The Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa should be done
during the eighth year from conception, of the Kṣatriya during the
eleventh year from conception, and of the Vaiśya during the twelfth year
from conception.’ *Viṣṇu*, 27.15-17.—‘The Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa
during the eighth year from conception; of the Kṣatriya during the
eleventh year from conception; of the Vaiśnava during the twelfth year
from conception.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.14.—‘The Brāhmaṇa’s Upanayana?s?? be performed either
during the eighth year from conception, or during the eighth year (from
birth); the Kṣatriya’s during the eleventh year; the Vaiśya’s during the
twelfth year; according to some, it is to be done in accordance with the
practice prevailing in the family.’

*Āśvalāyana* - *Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1.19.1-4.—‘The Brāhmaṇa’s, Upanayana should
be done during the eighth year, or during the eighth year from
conception; the Kṣatriya’s during the eleventh year; the Vaiśya’s during
the twelfth year.’

*Pāraskara-Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1-2.1-3.—‘The Brāhmaṇa’s Upanayana should be
performed during the eighth vear, or during the eighth year from
conception; the Kṣatriya’s during the eleventh year; the Vaiśya’s during
the twelfth year.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtrā*, 1.10.1-3.—‘The Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa should be
done during the eighth year from conception; of the Kṣatriya, during the
eleventh year; of the Vaiśya, during the twelfth year.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.19.—‘The Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa should be
done during the spring, of the Kṣatriya during the summer, and of the
Vaiśya, during the autumn. Of the Brāhmaṇa during the eighth year from
conception, of the Kṣatriya, during the twelfth year from conception.’

*Śruti* (Vīramitrodaya, Saṃskāra, p. 339).—‘The Upanayana of the
Brāhmaṇa should he performed when he is eight years old.’

*Āśvalāyana-Smṛti* (Do., p. 340).—‘The Brāhmaṇa should acquire the
‘twice-born’ state during the eighth year from conception, or during the
eighth, or the tenth year; the Kṣatriya during the eleventh year: and
the Vaiśya during the twelfth year.

*Nārada* (Do., p. 31-1).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the Upanayana should be
performed during the eighth year, either from conception or from birth;
for Kṣatriyas, during the eleventh year, and for Vaiśyas during the
twelfth year.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Do., p. 310).—‘The Upanayana of the Brāhmaṇa should he
performed during the fifth year from conception or during the eighth
year from conception; of the Kṣatriya during the eleventh year from
conception; of the Vaiśya, during the twelfth year.’

*Laugākṣi* (Do., p. 311'.—‘The Brāhmaṇa’s Upanayana during the seventh
year; of the Kṣatriya during the ninth year, and of the Vaiśya, during
the eleventh year.’

*Budha* (Aparārka, p. 31).—‘The Brāhmaṇa should get himself initiated in
his eighth year from conception, during the spring.'

*Shannaka* (Do.).—‘One should initiate the Brāhmaṇa in his eighth year,
or in his eighth year from conception; the Kṣattnya in the eleventh and
the Vaiśya in the twelfth year.’
