+++
title = "037 ब्रह्मवर्चस-कामस्य कार्यो"

+++
*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1.7-8.—‘When special results are desired, during
the ninth or the fifth year.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.21-26.—‘During the seventh year, if Brāhmic
glory is desired for the boy; during the eighth year, if longevity is
desired; during the ninth year, if brilliance is desired; during the
tenth year, if possession of much food is desired; during the eleventh
year, if efficiency of sense-organs is desired; during the twelfth year,
if possession of cattle is desired.’

*Uśanas* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 315).—‘The Upanayana of the
Brāhmaṇa should be done during the fifth year from birth, of the
Kṣatriya during the sixth, and of the Vaiśya during the seventh year,—if
strength is desired.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīra-Saṃskara, p. 345).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa if Brāhmic glory
is desired, his Upanayana should be performed during the eighth year
(either from conception or from birth); if food is desired, during the
ninth year; if intelligence is desired, during the tenth year: if
possession of jewels is desired, during the eleventh year; if bodily
stoutness is desired, during the twelfth year.’

*Aṅgiras* (Do., p. 346).—‘For the Kṣatriya desiring prosperity or
strength, it should be performed during the sixth or the twelfth year,
respectively; for the Vaiśya desiring success in agriculture or
longevity, it should be performed during the eighth or fourth year,
respectively.’

*Baudhāyana* (Do., p. 346).—‘During the seventh year, if Brāhmic glory
is desired; during the eighth, if longevity is desired; during the
ninth, if brilliance is desired; during the tenth, if food is desired;
during the eleventh, if efficient sense-organs are desired; during the
twelfth, if cattle is desired; during the thirteenth, if intelligence is
desired; during the fourteenth, if stoutness is desired; during the
fifteenth, if the birth of a brother’s son is desired; and during the
sixteenth, if all desirable things are desired.’
