+++
title = "038 आ षोदशाद्"

+++
**(Verse 38-39)  
**

*Viṣṇu*, 1.27.26.—(Exactly the same words as in Manu.)

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1.14.16.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the Sāvitrī does not
lapse till the sixteenth year; for the Kṣatriya, till the twenty-second
year; for the Vaiśya till two years longer.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1.2.13.—‘There is no lapse for these till the
sixteenth, the twentv-second and the twenty-fourth year, respectively.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.1.27.—‘Till the sixteenth year there is no
lapse for the Brāhmaṇa; till the twenty-second, for the Kṣatriya; and
till the twenty-fourth, for the Vaiśya; till then they would be fit for
keeping the observances that we are going to describe.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 11.51.53.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the time does not lapse
till the sixteenth year; for the Kṣatriya, till the twenty-second year;
for the Vaiśya, till the twenty-fourth year.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.19.5-6.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the time does not
lapse till the sixteenth year; for the Kṣatriya, till the twenty-second
year; for the Vaiśya, till the twenty-fourth year; after this, they
become *lapsed from the Sāvitrī*.’

*Pāraskara Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.5.36-38.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the time does not
become lapsed till the sixteenth year; for the Kṣatriya, till the
twenty-second and for the Vaiśya till the twenty-fourth year.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 3-12).—‘The twelfth, the
sixteenth and the twentieth years are the times not deprecated.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 342).—‘The time for Upanayana
extends up to the sixteenth, the twenty-second and the twenty-fourth
year, for the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya, respectively.

*Yājñavalkya* 1.38 (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 347).—‘After these years
all the three become fallen, excluded from all religious rites; and
become *apostates*, deprived of the Sāvitrī, until they perform the
Vrātyastoma.’

*Vyāsa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 343).—‘Sixteen years, twenty-two
years and twenty-four years constitute the time for Upanayana.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 343).—‘Sixteen years have been
prescribed for the Brāhmaṇa, twenty-two years for the Kṣatriya and
twenty-four years for the Vaiśya.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saihskāra, p. 343).—‘He who has dropped the
Sāvitrī for fifteen years, should keep the observance after having
shaven his head along with the Śikhā.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 347).—‘The apostates, fallen from
Sāvitrī, should be studiously shunned.’

*Āśvalāyana-Smṛti* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 343).—‘Sixteenth is the
limit for Brāhmaṇas for securing the status of the twice-born;
twenty-second for Kṣatriyas; and twenty-fourth for Vaiśyas.’

*Āśvalāyana-Smṛti* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 347).—‘After this, not
having acquired the status of the twice-born, they fall and become
apostates, excluded from Vedic rites.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 345).—The Brāhmaṇa who has passed
his sixteenth year, should not have his Upanayana performed; the
Kṣatriya after the twentieth year: and the Vaiśya after the twenty-fifth
year.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 347).—(Has the same defìni-tion of
the ‘Apostate’ as Yājñavalkya.)

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 347).—(Same as Manu, 39.)
