+++
title = "041 कार्ष्ण-रौरव-बास्तानि चर्माणि"

+++
*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 1.18.23.—‘Skins of the black deer, the spotted
deer and the goat; cloths of hemp, flax, tree-bark and kuśa grass,—for
all; also of cotton, pure white; according to some, also red-coloured,
for the Brāhmaṇa, dyed in tree-bark, for the other two castes, dyed in
*mañjiṣṭhā* and *haridrā*.’

*Gautama* (Aparārka, p. 58).—‘For all, the cotton cloth in its natural
colour.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1.2.15.—‘The skins of the black deer, the
spotted deer and the goat are the *skins*.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.2.39-41.—‘For clothing—hempen, flaxen and
skin—some people advice the reddish-brown cloth.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.3.1-9.—‘For the Kṣatriya, dyed in Mañjiṣṭhā;
for the Vaiśya, dyed in Haridrā; for the Brāhmaṇa, the skin of the white
or black deer; for the Kṣatriya, the skin of the spotted deer; for the
Vaiśya, the skin of the goat; the sheep-skin for all castes; as also the
woolen cloth; if the student is desirous of Brāhmic glory, he should
wear the skins alone; if desirous of Kṣattric glory, he should wear the
cloths alone; if desirous of both kinds of glory, he should wear both.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 11.47.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the upper garment consists
of the skin of the black deer; for the Kṣatriya, of the skin of the
spotted deer; for the Vaiśya, of the skin of the cow or of the goat.’
\[Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 413, reads for ‘Gavyam,’ ‘*āvyam*,’ which
means ‘of sheep.’ \]

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 11.49.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa, the doth new and white; for
the Kṣatriya, dyed in Mañjiṣṭhā; for the Vaiśya, dyed in Haridrā, or
silken; for all, woven cloth, undyed; the new white cotton cloth, as
also the hempen.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 27.19-20.—‘The upper garment should he of cotton, hemp
and wool; and the skins of the deer, the tiger and the goat.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.19.7.—‘The hoy should be adorned and having
his head shaven according to family-custom, clothed in new cloth or in
skin; the Brāhmaṇa in the skin of the black deer, the Kṣatriya in that
of the spotted deer, and the Vaiśya in that of the goat.’ \[The
‘*ahata*,’ ‘new,’ cloth has been thus defined by Pracetas:—‘slightly
washed, fresh-white, with ends intact, never worn before’—Vira-Saṃskāra,
p. 411.\]

*Āśvalāyana* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 411).—‘If they wear cloth, then
the Brāhmaṇa should wear the reddish-brown, the Kṣatṭriya that dyed in
Mañjiṣṭhā, and the Vaiśya that dyed in Haridrā.’

*Pāraskara- Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.5.16-19.—‘Cloths, hempen, flaxen and woolen;
for the Brahmaṇa, the upper garment is the skin of the black deer; for
the Kṣatriya, that of the spotted deer; and for the Vaiśya, either that
of the cow or the goat; or that of the cow for all.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyaṣūtra*, 2.10.7-8.—‘The cloths for these are flaxen,
hempen, cotton, and woolen; and the skins, those of the black deer, the
spotted deer and the goat.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.10.10.—‘For the Brāhmaṇa the cloth should be of
flax or of hemp; for the Kṣatriya of cotton; for the Vaiśya of wool.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 412).—‘The clothing to be worn
should be always white, whether it consists of flax, or cotton, or
grass, or skin, or tree-bark, or wool.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 412).—‘The water-pot, the
sacrificial thread and the reddish-brown cloth—these are common.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskara, p. 413).—‘The skins of the Kṛṣṇa,
the Ruru and the Pṛṣat deer.’

*Hīraṇyakeśin* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 413).—‘For the Brāhmaṇa the
skin of the black deer; for the Kṣatriya, that of the spotted deer; for
the Vaiśya, that of the goat.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 413).—‘The upper garment should
consist of the skins of the black deer, the spotted deer and the goat.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 413).—‘The Brāhmaṇa, the skin of the
black deer; the Kṣatriya, that of the spotted deer; and the Vaiśya, the
skin of the goat; or the skin of the spotted deer, for all.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 58).—‘For all, the skin of the Rum, the hempen
cloth and the woolen cloth, according to their circumstances, should
form the lower garment.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Aparārka, p. 414).—‘The skin for the Brāhmaṇa is of the
black deer; for the Kṣatriya, of the spotted deer; for the Vaiśya of the
goat; and the cloths are hempen, flaxen and woolen.’

\[The idea is that the lower garment should consist of *cloth* and the
upper garment of *skin.\]*

The size of the ‘skin’ to be worn has been prescribed by Śākala
(Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 414)—as ‘48 *aṅgulas* long and 4 *aṅgulas*
broad.’
