+++
title = "044 कार्पासम् उपवीतम्"

+++
*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 5.5.—‘The Sacred Garment consists of the
silken thread triplicated, hanging down to the navel and passing under
the right arm.’ \[‘*Kauśa*’ has been taken to mean ‘silken’ by the
*Kalpataru*, but ‘made of *kuśa*’ by the *Vīramitrodaya-* Saṃskāra, p.
415.\]

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 27.19.—‘The sacred garment and the cloths are to be of
cotton, hempen fibre and wool.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Vīra-Saṃskāra, p. 415).—‘Cotton thread is for all.’

*Gobhila* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 415).—‘The sacred garment is made
of cotton, cloth or *Kuśa* -string.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Sarhskāra,p. 415).—‘The Twice-born should wear
the sacred garment made of cotton or flax or cow-hair or hemp or
tree-bark or grass.’

*Devala* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 449).—‘The sacred thread should be made of
nine-yarned thread.’

*Ṛṣyaśṛṅga* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 449).—‘The purposes of the sacred
garment should be served by means of the cloth, and in the absence of
cloth, by means of the Triplicated Thread.’

*Ādityapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 449).—‘The sacred garment to be worn
should consist of either flax or cotton or hemp.’

*Bhṛgu and Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 416).—‘The Upavīta should consist of
three threads twisted upwards, then twisted downwards, then twisted
upwards again.

*Gṛhyapariśiṣṭa* (Do.).—‘One thread should be folded thrice and then
twisted three times.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘The sacred garment should consist of nine threads, with
a single knot.’

*Paiṭhinasi* (Do.).—‘The sacred garment should be of cotton for the
Brāhmaṇa consisting of six triplicated threads; for the Kṣatriya, of
flax, and for the Vaiśya, of wool.’

*Bhṛgu* (Do., p. 421).—‘For the Student there should be only one
Upavīta, for the Householder and the Recluse, two; and for the
Renunciate also only one.’

*Bhṛgu* (Aparārka, p. 58).—‘Three threads should he twisted upwards in
three folds; the Upavīta shall be triplicated; and it should have a
single knot.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Do.).—‘For the Accomplished Student there should he two
Upavītas.’

*Kaśyapa* (Do.).—‘For the Householder, they may he three, four, five,
eight or ten; for the Student only one; so also for the Recluse.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do., p. 422).—‘One should always wear the Upavīta.’

*Kātyāyana* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 449).—‘It should he of three threads
three-fold, twisted upward and turned downwards. It has one knot.’

*Pariśiṣṭa* (Do., p. 423).—‘During acts in honour of Gods, the garment
should be worn on the left shoulder (technically called *Upavīta*);
during those in honour of Pitṛs, on the right shoulder (technically
called *Prāchīnāvīta*); during malevolent rites, on both shoulders,
hanging over the chest down to the navel; and during the vulgar act,
hanging on the hack (technically called *nivīta*).’

*Śruti* (Darśapūrṇamāsa section—quoted by Śabara, 3.4.1).—‘*Nivīta* for
men, *Prachīnāvīta* for Pitṛs and *Upavīta* for Gods.’
