+++
title = "051 समाहृत्य तु"

+++
*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 2.46-47.—‘Having offered it to the Teacher, he
should eat it when permitted; in the absence of the Teacher, he should
offer it to his wife or to his son or to his own fellow-students.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 454).—‘Morning and evening,
he shall eat food which is respected, never decried.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasutra*, 1.3.31-35.—‘Having collected it, he should
describe it to the Teacher; he should eat it on being permitted by him;
during the Teacher’s absence, he should offer it to the Teacher’s
family; during the absence of these also, to other Vedic scholars; he
should never beg alms for himself alone.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 11.37.1.—‘Food should be eaten, with face
towards the East.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 27.9.—‘Alms should be begged from qualified persons,
never from the Teacher’s family; the food obtained should be eaten only
with his permission.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.31.—‘Having done his duty to the Fires, he should eat
his food silently, with the Teacher’s permission, after having sipped
water.’

*Āśvalāyana-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.22.9.—‘he should offer it to the Teacher and
then rest during the rest of the day.’

*Pāraskara-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.5.8.—‘He offers the alms obtained to the
Teacher; and then he should rest (luring the rest of the day, with
speech controlled,—‘so say some.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.10.11.—‘He offers the food to the Teacher.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 20.2.0.—‘He should cat seated, facing the
East, not disparaging the food, with attention fixed thereon; and after
having eaten, he should touch fire.’

*Yama* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 154).—‘He shall never receive more alms than
what would suffice for his meal; if he accepts more, he incurs the sin
of theft.’

*Gautama-Smṛti* (Do.).—‘In the absence of the Teacher, he shall seek the
permission (to eat) from the Teacher’s wife, or his son, or from his
fellow-students.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘The alms, examined, taken round the fire, shown to the
sun, offered to the Teacher and granted by him, is called *Nectar*.’
