+++
title = "058 ब्राह्मेण विप्रस्"

+++
**(Verses 58-59)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha-Sṃṛti*, 3. 29.—‘The line beyond the base of the thumb is the
*Brāhma-tīrtha*; through that one should sip water thrice and then wash
with water.’

*Viṣṇu-Sṃṛti*, 62. 6.—‘He should sip water through the *Brahma-tīrtha*.’

*Yajñavalkya*, 1.18.—‘With hands between his knees, seated on a pure
spot, facing the north or the east, the twice-born should sip water.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1. 5. 11.—‘One should sip water through the
*Brāhma-tīrtha*.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 5. 1. 12-13.—‘The base of the thumb is the
*Brāhma-tīrtha*; the tip of the thumb is the *Pitrya-tīrtha*; the tips
of the fingers, the *Daiva-tīrtha*; the base of the fingers, the
*Ārṣa-tīrtha*; the *Pitrya-tīrtha* is also that between the thumb and
the forefinger.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 62.1-4.—‘For the twice born, the base of the little
finger is the**Prājāpatya*-tīrtha*; at the base of the thumb, the
*Brāhma-tīrtha*; at the tip of the fingers, the *Daiva*; at the base of
the forefinger, the *Pitrya*.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.19.—‘The base of the little finger, the base of the
forefinger, the base of the thumb, and the tip of the fingers of the
hand constitute the *Prājāpatya, Pitrya, Brahma* and *Daiva* tīrthas
respectively.’

*Śaṅkha* (quoted in Medhātithi).—‘The *Kāya* is at the base of the
little finger; the *Prājāpatya* at the base of the thumb, the *Daiva*,
at the tips of the fingers; the *Pitrya*, at the base of the
index-finger.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 221).—‘The *Brahmatīrtha* is
situated to the left of the thumb, on the line pointing upwards; the
*Pitrya* between the thumb and the index finger; the *Prājāpatya*
between the palm and the little index: on the top of the finger tips,
the *Daiva*.’
