+++
title = "060 त्रिर् आचामेद्"

+++
*Bodhāyava-Dharmasūtra*, 1.5.15-10.—‘Thrice he should sip water,
reaching to the heart,—not laughing, not talking, not standing, not
looking this way and that, not stooping, not bowing down, not having his
*śikhā* untied, with throat not covered, nor with head covered, not in a
hurry, not without the sacred thread, not spreading out his feet, with
the end of his lower garment not tucked into the waist-band, with arms
not outside the knees, without making any sound; and he should wash
thrice; twice, according to some.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 1.5.21.—‘Touching the holes with water, he
should touch the feet, navel, head, and lastly, the left hand.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, l.38-42.—‘Seated on a clean spot, placing his
right arm between his knees, wearing the sacred thread, washing his
hands up to the wrist, with speech in check, he should sip water,
touching the heart, thrice or four times; he should wash twice; the feet
also; should touch the holes in the head; should sprinkle water on the
heart also.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.5.10. 2-9.—‘Seated, he should sip water
twice, reaching his heart; should wash the lips thrice—twice, say some;
once he should rinse his mouth,—twice, say some; washing the left hand
with the right, he should touch with water, the feet, the head, the
sense-organs, the eyes, the nostrils and the ears; then he should touch
water; when going to take food, he should, even though clean, sip water
twice, twice wash his lips and once rinse the mouth; he should sip water
alter having washed the lips to the ends.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 3.29-30.—‘With the *Brahma-tīrtha*, he should thrice
sip water and twice wash the lips with water; should touch the holes
with water; should sprinkle water on the head.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 62,6-8.—‘With the *Brahma-tīrtha*, he should sip water
thrice; twice wash; touch with water the holes, the head and the chest.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 2.5-8.—‘Going to the north of the Fire, washing
his hands, seated, he should sip water thrice, and wash twice; having
sprinkled water over the feet, he should sprinkle it over the head;
touch the organs with water; the eyes, the nostrils and the ears.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1-20.—‘Having sipped water thrice and washed twice, he
should touch the holes with water in its natural condition.’
