+++
title = "061 अनुष्णाभिर् अफेनाभिर्"

+++
*Bodhāyanā-Dharmasūtra*, 1. 5. 14.—‘Water-sipping should never be done
with the lingers, nor with such water as has hubbies or foam, is
brackish or saltish, or muddy, or discoloured, or foul-smelling.’

*Baudhāyana* (Vīra-Āhnika, p. 71).—‘Sipping should not be done with
water left over after washing the feet; or if this has to be done, it
should be done after pouring out some of the water on the ground.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 5. 15. 4-7.—‘Water should not bo sipped out of
rain-showers; nor out of cavities in the Earth; nor with warm water,
without reason.’ \[‘Reason’ such as sickness.\] \[Hut according to
Vaśiṣṭha, if the cavity contained water enough for satisfying the cow,
which is not unclean, then, it may be used.\]

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti*, 3. 36.—‘Sipping should not be done with water with bad
colour, bad smell or bad taste, or that proceeding from an unclean
source.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti*, 62. 5.—‘Seated in a clean place, with arms between the
knees, facing the East or the North, with happy and concentrated mind,
he should sip water, which is not fire-heated, which is free from foam,
which has not been brought by the Śūdra, and which is not brackish.’

*Yājñavalkya*, 1.20.—‘With water in its natural condition, free from
bubbles and foam.’

*Gobhila-Gṛhyasūtra*, 1.2.22-23.—‘With water, not hot, nor with
bubbles.’

*Śaṅkha* (Vīra-Āhnika, p. 66).—‘With water pulled out, which is free
from bubbles and foam, not heated by fire, nor brackish.’

*Gautama and Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 67).—‘Not with water fetched by a
Śūdra or an unclean person or by one hand.’ *Kūrmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘With
water which is not brackish and which has not been fetched by a Śūdra or
by an unclean person; nor with water brought with one hand.’

*Saṃvarta* (Do.).—‘Never with water offered by a Śūdra or an unclean
person, or with one hand.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 68).—‘With water pulled out, purified,
examined, not brackish, nor heated, nor with foam and bubbles.’

*Pracetas* (Do., p. 69).—‘One should twice, thrice or four times sip
water, without making any sound, which is not hot, nor with foam, which
has been purified by cloth and by the eve,—reaching the heart.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 70).—‘Nor with water which has not been looked into,
which is hot or unclean; discoloured or foul-smelling or foamy.’

*Parāśara* (Do., p. 71).—‘Sipping should not be done with water fetched
by a Śūdra, or with one hand, or by one who has not kept the
observances, or by an unknown person.’

*Yama* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 222).—‘It has been declared that at night,
the wise men may be purified by even such water as has not been looked
into; as also for sick men.’
