+++
title = "081 ॐ-कार-पूर्विकास् तिस्रो"

+++
**(verses 81-82)  
**

*Āpastamba* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 284).—‘Seated upon kuśa, holding kuśa
and water in his hand, facing the East, one shall repeat the Gāyatrī a
thousand times, or a hundred times, or without any limit.’

*Yogi- Yājñavalkya* (Do., 283).—‘The Religious Student and the
Agnihotrin should repeat the Gāyatrī 108 times: the Hermit and the
Renunciate, more than 1,000 times,

*Yama* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 286).—‘There is nothing superior to the
Gāyatrī for purposes of *Japa*; there is no penance higher than the
Gāyatrī; there is no meditation higher than the Gāyatrī; there is no
*Homa* higher than the *Viṣṇusmṛti*, 55. 15-16—\[reproduces the words of
Manu\].

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 429).—‘He who acquires the three
Vyāhṛtis preceded by the syllable *om*, and the Sāvitrī, Brahmacharya
and is called *Śrotriya*.’

*Laugākṣi* (Do.).—‘Having pronounced *om bhūrbhuvaḥsvaḥ*, he pronounces
the Sāvitrī verse beginning with *Tat savituḥ*.’

‘*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 2. 4. 21.—‘The Brāhmaṇa who daily, at all
junctures, meditates upon this, becomes purified to Brahmaṇa and merged
in Brāhmaṇ; following the scriptures, he wins the Brahmic regions.’

*Vyāsa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 285).—‘By repeating the Gāyatrī ten times
one becomes absolved from all little sins committed during the day;
repeated a hundred times, she destroys a host of sins; repeated a
thousand times, she destroys all minor sins; by repeating it a *lakh* of
times, all the most heinous sins are destroyed; by repeating it a crore
of times, one obtains all that is desired.’

*Saṃvarta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 522).—‘One should utter the
*Praṇava* first: after that, the Vyāhṛtis; and then the Sāvitrī.’

*Yogi-Yāmavalkya* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 258).—‘Gāvatrī is Brahmā and
Sāvitrī is Rudra.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 321, also Parāśaramadhava, p.
284).—‘One should daily repeat the Gāyatrī, which is destructive of all
sins, a thousand times, or a hundred times, or at least ten times; the
Lord put the Gāyatrī in one pan and the Vedas along with the subsidiary
sciences in the other pan of the scale; and the two were found equal.’

*Aṅgiras* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 322)—‘One who is intent upon the
Praṇava, the seven Vyāhṛtis, and the three-footed Gāyatrī has no fear
anywhere.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 323).—‘The Praṇava, the Vyāhṛtis the
Sāvitrī verse,—these constitute the *Sāvitra*, whereby one becomes
absolved from sins; by hundred repetitions, from sins of thought; by
thousand repetitions, from sins of word; and by ten thousand
repetitions, from all sins, and has his soul perfectly pure.’
