+++
title = "101 पूर्वां सन्ध्याम्"

+++
*Dakṣa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 267).—‘The junction of Day and Night,
devoid of the Sun, and the Stars, is called the *Twilight*.’

*Dakṣa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 269).—‘Two *nādis* at the end of night is
the beginning of the Twilight; and the appearance of the first streak of
the sun is its end.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 2. 17.—‘The morning prayers should be offered
while the stars are still visible, and the Evening Prayers, before the
stars become visible,—the man being seated and speech held in check.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, (4.2. 10,12,13).—‘The Morning Prayers should
be offered by one seated facing the East;—it may be begun before
sunrise, but it should be completed as soon as the sun has risen the
Evening Prayers should he begun before sunset; it may be completed later
on.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.11.30. 8).—‘The two Twilight Prayers should
be offered outside the village, with speeoh controlled.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-smṛti* (26. 2-3).—‘Whatever sins, in act, mind Or speech, may
have been committed during the day,—the man casts off by means of
Breath-suspensions during the performance of the Evening
Prayers;—whatever sins...... during the day... Morning Prayers.’

*Viṣṇu-smṛti* (27. 2-3).—‘Prayers during the two twilights;—the Morning
one should he offered standing, and the Evening one, sitting.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1. 24-25).—‘One should continue to repeat the Sāvitrī in
the evening till the appearance of the stars; and in the morning till
the appearance of the sun.’

*Samvarta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 447).—‘In the morning the
Twilight Prayers should be offered while the stars are still visible;
the Evening Prayers while the sun is still visible, being only half-set;
the student should offer the morning prayers, standing, and the evening
prayers, seated.

*Vyāsa* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 268).—Since they worship the Twilight at
the time of the junction of day and night, they call it the *Twilight
Prayer*.’

*Yogi-Yājñavalkya* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 268).—‘One should offer the
Twilight Prayers at the junction, not either after sunset or after
sunrise.’

*Taittirīya-Brāhmaṇa* (*Parāśaramādhava*, p. 268).—‘Meditating upon the
sun, rising and setting, if the learned Brāhmaṇa offer the Prayers, he
obtains all that is good.’

*Śaṅkha (Parāśaramādhava*, p. 275).—‘The Morning Twilight is accompanied
by stars, and the Evening one by the sun; both these one should
observe.’
