+++
title = "107 यः स्वाध्यायम्"

+++
*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (30. 34-38).—‘When one recites the Ṛk verses, he satisfies
the Pitṛs with clarified butter;—when he recites the Yajuṣ verse, he
satisfies them with honey;—when he recites the Sāma verses, he satisfies
them with milk;—when he recites the Atharva verses, he satisfies them
with meat;—when he reads the Purāṇas, the Itihāsas, the Vedic Subsidiary
Sciences and the Dharmaśāstras,—he satisfies them with grain-food.’

*Yājñavalkya-Smṛti* (1. 41-47).—‘One who daily reads the Ṛk verses
satisfies the gods and the Pitṛs with honey and clarified butter;—he who
reads the Yajuṣ verses every day, to the best of his ability, satisfies
the gods with clarified butter and the Pitṛs with clarified butter and
honey;—he who reads the Sāma verses daily satisfies the gods with Soma
and clarified butter, and the Pitṛs with honey and clarified butter;—he
who daily reads the Atharvāñgiras texts satisfies the gods with fat and
the Pitre with honey and clarified butter;—he who to the best of his
capacity, daily reads the Vākovākya, Purāṇa, the Narāśamsī hymns,
ītihāsa and the Sciences, satisfies the gods with meat, milk, rice and
honey, and the Pitṛs with honey and clarified butter—all these being
satisfied endow him with all kinds of prosperity.’

*Āpastamba-Gṛhyasūtra* (3. 3. 2-3).—‘When one reads the Ṛk verses he
satisfies the gods with offerings of milk;—when he reads the Yajuṣ
verses, with offerings of clarified butter;—when he reads the Sāma
verses, with offerings of honey;—when he reads the Atharvāñgiras verses,
with offerings of Soma;—when he reads the Brāhmaṇas, the Kalpas, the
Nārāśamsī hymns, the Itihāsas and the Purāṇas,—with offerings of nectar.
When he reads the Ṛk verses, streams of milk reach his Pitṛs;—when he
reads the Yajuṣ verses, streams of clarified butter;—when he reads the
Sāma verses, streams of honey;—when he reads the tharvāúgiras verses,
streams of Soma;—when he reads the Brāhmaṇas, the Kalpas, the Nārāśamsī
hymns, the Itihāsas and Purāṇas, streams of nectar.’
