+++
title = "108 अग्नीन्धनम् भैक्षचर्याम्"

+++
*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra* (2. 1. 20-21, 43).—‘Every day he should fetch
fuel from the forest and lay it;—he should rise before the Teacher and
sleep after him;—during the course of his study, he should attend upon
the Teacher and follow him.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1. 1. 2. 15).—‘He should never bear malice
towards the Teacher.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1. 1. 2. 11).—‘After initiation the boy should
live with the Teacher as a religious student.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.3.2. 20-21).—‘Always doing good to the
teacher, never crossing him in his words; sleeping on a lower bed.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1. 1. 4. 13, 14, 16).—‘Morning and evening he
should fetch a jar of water;—always he should fetch fuel from the forest
and lay it down;—having kindled the fire and cleaned the place, he
should lay fuel upon it, both morning and evening, in accordance with
instructions.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.1. 3. 25).—‘Morning and evening he should beg
for food from people other than those that are wicked or accused of evil
deeds; and after having presented to the teacher all that he obtains, he
should live upon what the Teacher gives him.’

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti* (1. 3, 4, 5, 10, 11).—‘The Religious Student shall
serve the Teacher till ṭhe death of his body;—he shall keep his speech
under control and having begged food, he shall take it either during the
fourth or the sixth or the eighth part of the day;—he shall come to read
when called;—whatever food he obtains by begging, he shall present to
the Teacher, and shall eat only with his permission;—during the day, he
shall avoid sleeping on the bedstead, washing the teeth, applying of
collyrium to the eyes, oiling of the body, wearing of shoes and carrying
of the umbrella;—he shall rest during the night.’

*Viṣṇu-Smṛti* (27. 4, 7, 9, 12).—‘Both times he shall bathe and tend the
fire;—he shall do what is good for and agreeable to the Teacher;—he
shall beg alms from respectable families, but not from his Teacher’s
family;—he shall sleep on the ground.’

*Yājñavalkya-Smṛti* (1.25,27, 28).—‘Both morning and evening he shall
attend upon the fire;—he shall always do, with his mind, speech and body
what is good for his teacher; for his livelihood, he shall beg food from
respectable Brāhmaṇas.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (*Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra*, p. 489).—‘The Religious
Student shall always wear the girdle, the skin, the staff, the Upavīta,
the loin-slip and the waist-band.’

*Yama* (*Do. and Parāśaramādhava*, p. 455).—‘Living on food received in
alms, he shall live with the Teacher, and keep the staff, the water-pot,
the kuśa-bundle, muñja-girdle, and the vow of celibacy. The Religious
Student shall always carry the girdle, the skin, the staff, the sacred
thread, the loin-slip, and the thread round the loins.’

*Vyāsa* (Do.).—‘Sleeping after the Teacher and rising before him, living
in the teacher’s house, he shall do all that should be done by the pupil
and the servant; he shall always stay by his side, his constant
attendant; he shall not eat until the Teacher has eaten; nor shall he
drink water until the Teacher has drunk it; he shall not sit while the
Teacher is standing, nor sleep while he is sitting.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Do. 490).—‘He shall attend upon the Teacher, for purposes
of Vedic study; he shall read when he is called upon to do so: whatever
he obtains in alms he shall present to the Teacher.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘He shall serve the Teacher by fetching water, gathering
Kuśa, flowers, fuel, roots and fruits, sweeping, washing, bodily
service; he shall attend upon him while he is walking, sitting or
sleeping; he shall never sleep over what has been worn by him, or over
his bed and seat or wear his sandals or step over his shadow.’

*Āpastamba* (Do.).—‘He should be entirely subservient to the
Teacher,—except as regards the degrading crimes.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘Subservient to the Teacher, not independent, living in
the Teacher’s house, he shall rise before him and sleep after him; he
shall keep his sleep and food under control, suppressing indolence and
anger, fully self-controlled, ever attentive, free from egotism and
devoted to the service of the Teacher.’

*Viṣṇu* (Do., p. 491).—‘He shall never sit on the same seat with his
Teacher, except upon rafts and boats.’

*Sumantu* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 455).—‘Celibacy, austerity, alms-begging,
fire-tending during the twilights, Vedic study, service of the Teacher,
these the Religious Student shall observe.’
