+++
title = "138 चक्रिणो दशमीस्थस्य"

+++
**(verses 138-139)  
**

*Vaśiṣṭha-Smṛti* (13.25, 26).—‘Among the following—an aged person, a
child, a sick person, a man carrying a load, a woman, a man driving in a
chariot,—the succeeding should make way for the preceding; when the King
and the Accomplished Student meet, the king should make way for the
student; all should make way for a bride who is being married.’

*Gautama-Dharmasūtra*, 6. 25, 26.—‘One on a chariot, a man in the tenth
stage of life, one who deserves kindness (*i.e*., the sick), a bride, an
Accomplished Student, and the King,—for these way should he made; the
King should make way for the Vedic scholar.’

*Baudhāyana-Dharmasūtra*, 2. 3. 50 (also Devala quoted in
Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 476).—‘Way should he made for the Brāhmaṇa,
the cow, the king, the blind person, the aged, the man suffering under a
load, a pregnant woman and a weak person.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 2. 2. 57.—‘Way should be made for the King
until he meets the Brāhmaṇa; but when he meets the Brāhmaṇa, way should
be made for the latter. All men should make way for a conveyance, for
one carrying a load, one struck with disease, and a woman; to one of
superior caste; and also to the Renunciate, and the intoxicated and the
lunatic,—these latter for the sake of one’s own safety.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, 6.475).—‘Way should be made
for the dumb, the blind, the deaf, the intoxicated, the lunatic, the
loose woman, one’s enemy, a child and the outcast.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 476).—‘Way should be made
for the child, the aged, the intoxicated, the lunatic, one struck with a
foul disease, one carrying a load, a woman who is pregnant, the
Accomplished Student, the Renunciate, and also persons excelling in
learning, arts and other qualities.’

*Yājñavalkya* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 476).—‘Way should be made for
the aged, the man with a load, the King, the Accomplished Student, a
woman, the sick, the bridegroom, the man on a chariot; among these the
King deserves special honour; but the Accomplished Student deserves
honour even from the King.’
