+++
title = "165 तपो-विशेषैर् विविधैर्"

+++
**(verses 165-166)  
**

*Gautama*, 2.10.12.—‘The observances begin with the Initiation;
fire-kindling, alms-begging, truthfulness of speech.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra*, 1.5.1-5.—‘The term *tapas* is applied to the
observances; deviation therefrom leads to the dwindling of Knowledge and
Duty; on account of deviation from the observances, no sages appear
among those who are thereby degraded; whatever the man acquires from the
Teacher, with his mind collected, the fruits thereof accrue to him like
Brahman itself: and whatever he thinks of acquiring either by mind or
speech or eyes, it comes about exactly as he wishes.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.12-1).—‘Vedic study is the austerity.’

*Viṣṇu* (8.34-36).—‘Thus should he learn one Veda, or two Vedas or three
Vedas; and then the Vedic subsidiaries; he who, without having studied
the Veda, works on other things, becomes a Śūdra, along with his
offspring.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.40).—‘For the twice-born, the Veda is what is conducive
to his highest good.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1-90).—‘He should learn the meaning of the Veda, as also
the various sciences.’

*Kumārila* (Vīramitrodaya-saṃskāra, p. 505).—‘It is not right for one to
study a rescensional text other than the one pertaining to himself by
hereditary tradition.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 505).—‘There should be study of
one’s own rescensional text; it is only after he has studied his own
text that he should study another.’

*Laugākṣi* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 507).—‘He who, abandoning his own
rescensional text, learns another, should be expelled from all rites
performed in honour of the Gods and Pitṛs.’

*Parāśara* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 507).—‘For the proper fulfilment
of the rites, the meaning of the Veda should be always learnt; he who
learns merely the verbal text suffers as badly as the cow in the mud;
the learning of the Veda and also of the Dharmaśāstra is futile, if the
meaning is not understood.’

*Vyāsa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 508).—‘Dharma cannot be learnt from
any other source; as it was out of the Veda that it shone forth;
therefore for the purpose of sacrifices, one should make every effort to
have recourse to the Veda.’

*Dakṣa* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 508).—‘The *Study of Veda* is
fivefold—(1) learning up of the text, (2) pondering over it, (3)
repeating it, (4) reciting it, and (5) teaching it.’

*Śruti* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 507).—‘The Brāhmaṇa should study the
Veda along with subsidiary sciences, disinterestedly.’ *Śaṅkha*
(Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 511).—‘Without having read the Veda, one
should not study any other science, except the Vedic Subsidiaries.’

*Harīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 512).—‘The Veda is the science for
the Brāhmaṇa.’

*Dakṣa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 306).—‘For the second part, the study of
the Veda has been prescribed.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 307).—‘One should then carry on the
study of the Veda, to the best of his ability; one should recite it,
teach it to pupils, hold it in memory and ponder over it and also look
into the scriptures hearing upon Dharma and so forth.’
