+++
title = "173 कृतोपनयनस्याऽस्य व्रतादेशनम्"

+++
*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (22.1-2).—‘Having tied the girdle, and handed
over the staff, he should direct him to Religious Studentship—“Thou art
a Religious Student, sip water, do your duty, sleep not during the day,
study the Veda under the Teacher.”’

*Yājñavalkya* (2-15).—‘The Teacher, having initiated the boy, should
teach him the Veda preceded by the *mahāvyāhṛtis*, and instruct him
regarding cleanliness and conduct.’

*Gautama* (2-20).—‘The restrictions begin with the Upa nayana.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.2.11, 17-20).—‘On being initiated, the boy
should reside in the Teacher’s family, as a Religious Student; there is
no fasting for the Religious Student desirous of acquiring knowledge;
the rule for the Religious Student is that he should he entirely under
the Teacher, except as regards the committing of degrading sins; he
should he ever bent upon the good of the Teacher, never crossing him in
speech.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (4.13, 14, 16).—‘Morning and evening, he should
fetch a jar of water;—every day he should bring fuel from the forest and
keep it on the ground;—having kindled the fire and swept round it, he
should lay fuel on it, morning and evening, in accordance with the
instructions he receives.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (5.5).—‘He should do such acts as might be
pleasing to the Teacher.’

*Viṣṇu* (28.1).—‘For Religious Students, residence in the Teacher’s
house.’

*Viṣṇu* (2,14).—‘The offering of the two Twilight Prayers; and after
offering it, he should salute the Teacher.’

*Viṣṇu* (34-35).—‘Thus he should make his own either one Veda, or two
Vedas, or three Vedas; then the Vedic Subsidiaries.’

*Viṣṇu* (34-42).—‘After having made the Veda his own, he should obtain
the Teacher’s permission and offer him an excellent thing and then
bathe.’

*Viṣṇu* (19.1).—‘Him should one know as the *Teacher* who initiates him,
teaches him the observances and teaches tho Veda.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (2.20. 33-34).—‘Then he directs the boy—thou art a
Religious Student,—fetch fuel, sip water, do thy duty, sleep not during
the day.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (3. 4. 1).—‘The Religious Student should study the
Veda.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (1. 1. 7).—‘The Religious Student having studied
the Veda, should make the final offering of fuel on the fire.’

*Śaṅkha* (3.1-2).—‘Having initiated the pupil, the Teacher should first
of all instruct him regarding cleanliness, course of conduct,
fire-tending, the offering of Twilight-Prayers. That person is the
*Guru* who having performed all the rites, imparts to him the Veda.’
