+++
title = "175 सेवेतेमांस् तु"

+++
*Laghvāśvalāyana Smṛti* (1.5).—‘The Religious Student, firm in his own
duty, should remain devoted to the service of the Teacher.’

*Laghvāśvālāyana Smṛti* (12.15-16).—‘Then he should make the student get
up the Veda on such days as are fit for study; being initiated, from
that day onwards for six months, he should serve the Teacher and study
the Veda in the prescribed manner.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (5.2-3).—‘Having studied either one Veda, or two Vedas, or
three Vedas,—his studentship unruffled, the Religious Student should
serve the Teacher.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (26.18-19).—‘As horses, without a chariot, or a chariot
without horses, so is Austerity without Knowledge, and Knowledge without
Austerity. Just as food mixed with honey, or honey mixed with food, is
wholesome, so also are Knowledge and Austerity united.’

*Gautama* (3.9.5).—‘Conducting himself thus, with senses subdued, he
reaches Brahmic regions.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.2,11,12,19,26).—‘After initiation, residence
in the Teacher’s house...... He should never have sexual intercourse.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (4. 23, 29).—‘He should every day safeguard the
interests of the Teacher by means of virtuous and prudent acts; the
Religious Student, with mind concentrated, should perform all useful
acts.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (5.1, 5, 9-11).—‘The term Austerity stands for
the Restrictions; he should perform such acts as may be pleasing to the
Teacher;—attentive to Vedic study, bent upon Dharma, fixed in austerity,
straightforward and merciful, thus does the Religious Student become
accomplished.’

*Viṣṇu* (27.47).—‘The Brāhmaṇa who carries on his studentship in this
manner goes to the highest place and is not born again.’

*Viṣṇu* (1.24).—‘Delighting in learning the Veda, living under the
Teacher, bent upon the Teacher’s good.’

*Vyāsasmṛti* (1.24).—‘Being initiated, he should reside in the Teacher’s
house, ever calm and collected; on a sacred day, having pronounced the
Praṇava and the Gāyatrī, he should begin the study of the Veda, also the
Dharmaśāstra, for the purpose of understanding cleanliness and conduct;
having duly read all this from the Teacher, he should act so as to
please him; in this manner should he keep the observances of his
studentship. He should ever attend upon him till he completes his Veda
study.’

*Nārada* (5.8-15).—‘Till he has mastered the sciences, the student shall
attend diligently on his Teacher; the same conduct has to be observed by
him towards the Teacher’s wife and son. He shall preserve chastity and
beg alms, lying on a low couch and using no ornaments. He shall go to
rest after, and rise before, all persons in the Teacher’s house. He
shall never come or stay without his Teacher’s bidding; his Teacher’s
call he must obey without hesitation, when he is able to do so. He shall
read at the proper time, when his Teacher is not averse to it, sitting
on a lower seat than his Teacher, by his side, or on a bench and paying
attention to what he says. Science, like the current of a stream, is
constantly advancing towards the plain; therefore one studying science
should be humble towards his Teacher. His Teacher shall correct him, if
he is not obedient, scolding him or chastising him with a rope or with a
small shoot of cane. The Teacher shall not strike him a heavy blow; nor
on the head or on the chest; and he must encourage him after having
chastised him. Otherwise the king shall punish the Teacher. After having
completed his studies, he shall give the customary present to his
Teacher and return home. Thus should be the conduct of the Student.’
