+++
title = "177 वर्जयेन् मधु"

+++
**(verses 177-179)  
**

*Gautama* (2.19).—‘He should abstain from honey, meat, scents, garland
and the like, sleeping during the day, anointing, riding on conveyances,
applying collyrium, wearing shoes, umbrella, attachment, anger, avarice,
delusion, wrangling, bathing, teeth-cleansing, rejoicing, dancing,
singing, calumniating and dangers.’

*Āpastamba-Dharmasūtra* (1.23-26).—‘Avoiding saline salts, honey and
meat; not using scents;—he should never have recourse to sexual
intercourse;—free from anger, and jealousy.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1-33).—‘Honey, meat, collyrium, eating of leavings,
fermented acids, woman, killing of living creatures, gazing at the Sun,
indecent talk and so forth,—these he shall avoid.’

*Pāraskara Gṛhyasūtra* (2.5).—‘He should avoid honey, meat, collyrium,
sitting on a raised seat, approaching women, lying, taking what is not
given.’

*Gobhila Gṛhyasūtra* (3.1,16.25).—‘Sexual intercourse, dramatic acting,
scents, collyrium, honey and meat, anger, lying, sleeping on raised bed,
bathing, scratching of ground, teeth-washing, feet-washing, use of the
razor, riding on conveyances yoked with bulls, wearing of shoes within
the village,—he shall avoid.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.2.25).—‘Dancing, singing, playing on musical
instruments, scents, garlands, shoes, holding of umbrella,
anointing,—these he shall avoid.’

*Viṣṇu* (28.11).—‘He should abstain from śrāddhas, artificial salts,
fermented acids, food kept over-night, dancing, singing, women, honey,
meat, collyrium, eating of leavings, killing of animals, indecencies.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 495).—‘He shall abstain from riding
on horses and elephants and oxen, walking over funeral pyres, ascending
trees, much talking, passing through crevices and openings, crossing of
large rivers and oceans, dangerous positions.’

*Kūrma-Purāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava).—‘He shall not look at the mirror; he
shall not cleanse his teeth; the leavings of his teacher also he shall
use as a medicine, not with an eager longing for them.’
