+++
title = "092 धृतिः क्षमा"

+++
**(verses 6.87-93)**

See Comparative notes for [Verse
6.87].

**(verse 6.92)  
**

‘*Dhṛtiḥ*’—‘Fortitude, calmness even on the loss of wealth and such
other calamities’;—‘firmness of purpose in the discharge of duties’
(Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

‘*Damaḥ*’—‘Humility’ (Medhātithi);—‘patience under sufferings’
(Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa);—‘subjugation of the mind’ (Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda).

‘*Dhīḥ*’—‘True knowledge, free from doubts and errors (Medhātithi and
Govindarāja);—‘knowledge of the true meaning of the śāstras’ (Kullūka
and Rāghvānanda);—Nārāyaṇa and Nandana, reading ‘*hrīḥ*’, explain it as
‘modesty’.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 972), which explains ‘*śaucam*’
as ‘purity of mind and body’,—‘*dhīḥ*’ as ‘discrimination of right and
wrong’,—‘*dhṛtiḥ*’ as ‘keeping the mind from going astray’,—‘*damaḥ*’ as
‘controlling of the mind by means of the *Kṛcchra* and other
austerties’. It adds that this verse enumerates the duties common to all
the four orders;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 16a);—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 13), which has the following
notes;—‘*Dhṛti*’, firmness,—‘*kṣamā*’ is nonperturbation of the mind
even when wronged,—‘*dama*’ is control of the ‘mind’,—‘*asteya*’ is
non-appropriation of what is not given,—‘*śauca*’ is cleanliness, both
internal and external,—‘*indriyanigraha*’ is keeping the senses from all
forbidden objects,—‘*hrī*’ (which is its reading for ‘*dhī*’) is
cessation from improper acts,—‘*vidyā*’ is self-knowledge—‘*satya*’ is
saying what is true, which should be *agreeable* also,—‘*akrodha*’ is
freedom from anger.


