+++
title = "003 यात्रामात्रप्रसिद्ध्य्-अर्थं स्वैः"

+++
The preceding verse has described the means of daily subsistence; the
present verse is going to mention rules regarding the accumulating of
wealth.

‘*One shall accumulate wealth by means of one’s own occupations*.’—These
occupations shall be described later on.

The author states the purpose for which wealth is to be accumulated:
‘*For the accomplishment of bare maintenance*’—Wealth shall be
accumulated, not for the purposes of pleasure, but simply for the sake
of maintenance. ‘*Maintenance*’ stands for the subsisting of oneself and
one’s family; and what just suffices for that is called ‘*bare
maintenance*;’—‘*the accomplishment*,’ or bringing about of this, is the
‘*purpose*’ of the accumulation. The performance of obligatory duties is
included under one’s ‘own subsistence;’ for, until one performs these,
one’s own subsistence is not accomplished. It has been said above
(3.72)—‘he who does not make the five offerings, is not alive, even
though he may be breathing.’

Or, what is meant is that, even though a certain means of accumulating
wealth may be sanctioned by the scriptures, if it happen to be such as
is considered reproachable in the eyes of men, it shall be avoided. For
instance, when a man of noble family has spent all his belongings, he
shall avoid living by such means as the receiving of gifts from a person
of his own caste, but of a low family, who may have acquired wealth.

‘*Without causing trouble to the body*’—Service and Trade are sources of
great suffering to the body, involving as they do long journeys and
other troubles: so that these should be avoided.

‘*Accumulation*.’—Collecting and keeping.—(3).
