+++
title = "005 ऋतम् उञ्छ-शिलम्"

+++
The corn that is gleaned is to be known as ‘Truth;’ living by this means
being regarded as equal to the strict observance of truth. When after
harvesting, corn is being carried either home or to the granary, if
certain ears of corn fall down on the ground, and are left by the
owner’—the picking up of these is what is called “gleaning;” and this is
called ‘Truth;’ and in regard to this, one need not entertain any such
idea as ‘this belongs to another person, so I shall not take it.’

Similarly, when one takes away what has fallen off from the sheaf—either
before or after harvesting,—and what forms part of several
offshoots,—this is ‘picking.’

‘*What is obtained unasked is* *Nectar*’—so called, because it is a
source of great pleasure.

‘*The alms obtained by begging is Death*.’— The term ‘begging’ itself
signifying the fact of what is obtained being ‘alms,’ the addition of
this latter term—which is formed by the adding of a Nominal Affix
denoting a *group* or *collection*,—is meant to imply that several
persons shall be begged, and no single person shall be constantly
troubled, as is shown by what has been said above regarding ‘what
involves very little trouble to living beings.’ Then again, as a rule,
the term ‘*bhaikṣa*,’ ‘alms,’ is found to be used in the sense of
*cooked food*; as we find in the case of such passages as—‘for the
purpose of cleansing oneself from *alms*;’ hence the adding of the term
‘begging’ serves to indicate that ‘alms’ stands here for *food in
general*; hence what is meant here is not *cooked food* only; specially
as for one who has set up the Fire, it would be wrong to make the
*Vaiśvadeva* and other offerings with food cooked in any other fire.

The begging of alms here spoken of is not meant to be that only which is
got for eating; it stands for what enables the man to maintain himself;
and the maintenance of the householder is not accomplished merely by
eating; in fact, it requires all such things as are necessary for
house-keeping; hence it is that water-vessels and other such articles
should also be begged; as also such household-requisites as dishes and
covers, etc. So far as the Student is concerned, since for him it is
impossible that just at the time of his eating, cooking should be done
in the proper manner;—it follows that in his case ‘alms’ must mean
*cooked food* only.

The term ‘*bhikṣā*,’ ‘alms,’ also indicates the quantity of the article
obtained by begging; this quantity being a mere *handful*. But when a
man is begged, he does not give mere alms, a mere handful; so that the
begging of the cow, gold and such other things could not be regarded as
sanctioned by the mere ‘handful.’ In fact, begging is always done for
the purpose of receiving all kinds of gifts.

“The receiving of *alms* also would be a receiving of gifts.”

No; mere acceptance does not constitute the ‘receiving of gifts;’ the
root ‘*graha*,’ with the preposition ‘*prati*,’—*i.e*., the term
‘*pratigraha*,’ ‘receiving of gifts’—is applied to a particular form of
‘acceptance,’ and not to any and every *acceptance*. Wherever the term
‘*pratigraha*,’ ‘gift,’ is used—*e. g*., under 4.186 and 10.100—it is
used in the sense of such *gift* as is offered with a view to some
transcendental result, and is received with due *mantras*. In the
receiving of mere ‘*alms*,’ however, there is no reciting of any such
*mantra* as ‘*devasya tvā, etc*.’ Nor again, is the term applied to the
accepting of friendly and other presents; in the sense of this latter,
the term is never used.

From all this it follows that the terms ‘Truth’ and ‘Nectar’ are used in
the sense of things other than ‘gifts.’ Hence, in this case, the man who
gives, whether begged or un-begged, is a high-souled person, and, hence,
in his mind there does not arise any desire for any form of return (for
the gift he makes); so that there would be no grounds for any
restriction as to the caste, etc., of the recipient or giver. When a
present is made entirely through sympathy for the receiver, it does not
become a ‘gift’ (which always connotes the presence of desire for some
transcendental result).

“But what is given through sympathy or pity is also conducive to
transcendental results.”

We say—no; because it does not fulfil the conditions of ‘*dāna*,’
‘giving’ (formal); it being prompted either by pity or by the desire to
do good to others. Hence, just as in offering advice, through sympathy,
considerations of caste do not come in; so in the case of giving through
pity also. It is for this reason that in the case of such giving,
cultured people do not observe any such restrictions as ‘gifts should be
offered to the Brāhmaṇa who knows the real meaning of the Veda,’ and so
forth. It is for this same reason, again, that even non-Brāhmaṇas, on
becoming poor, accept gifts offered by others, but are not, on that
account, regarded as having ‘received gifts,’ and thus transgressed upon
the Brāhmaṇas ‘livelihood.’

The conclusion, therefore, is as follows:—Though in the regular
‘*gift*,’ considerations of its being *asked* or *unasked* do come in,
yet it does not, merely on that account, become either ‘Truth’ or
‘Nectar;’ because it has been shown that these terms have a different
connotation.

This same connotation is applicable to ‘officiating at sacrifices’ and
‘teaching’ (the other two means of livelihood for the Brāhmaṇa): Some
one obtains the post of officiating at a sacrifice after having begged
for it from some one. Similarly with the work of Teaching also.

Any such means of living as is obtained by begging, involves
humiliation; and hence, resembling death, it is called ‘death.’

Cultivating is worse even than Death; specially as the act of ploughing
and carrying of burdens is the work of lower people.—(5)


