+++
title = "007 कुसूल-धान्यको वा"

+++
It has been declared that wealth should be accumulated for the
maintenance of oneself and family; and no trouble shall be undertaken
for mere pleasure; it has not been said whether the man is to acquire
wealth day by day, or only once, sufficient to last for a long time.
Hence the Text now proceeds to show how one is to earn a living lasting
for some length of time.

‘*Kusūladhānyakaḥ*.’—One who has grains in a granary; the compound being
a *Bahuvrīhi*, where the members are not in apposition to each other.

Another reading is ‘*Kusūladhānyikaḥ*;’ in which case, the term
*Kusūladhānya* would mean ‘grains enough to fill a granary;’ and one who
possesses this would be ‘*Kusūladhānyika*;’ the word being formed with
the Possessive affix ‘*ik*.’

Receptacles built of bricks and such things, which contain grains, are
called ‘*Kusūla*’ or ‘*Koṣṭha*,’ ‘granary;’ and this term serves to
indicate the quantity; the sense being that ‘one shall accumulate grains
in such quantities as may fill a granary and it does not mean that ‘he
must use the *granary only* as the receptacle for grains.’ What the text
permits, by means of the word ‘granary,’ is the accumulating of just
that quantity of grain which may suffice to maintain for one year the
family of a man with large responsibilities, having a large number of
servants, relations, wives, slaves, children, cattle, horse, and such
other things. That such is the sense, is shown by what is going to be
said (in 11.7) regarding the man who has grains sufficient for three
years.

Significance is not meant to be attached to the term ‘grains’ also; in
fact, there would be nothing wrong in the man acquiring such quantities
of gold, silver and such things as would suffice for the said
maintenance. All that the text means is that one should not accumulate
more than that.

‘*Kumbhī*’ is the same ‘*uṣṭṛka*,’ ‘jar.’ They say that this stands for
such quantity as would suffice for six months.

‘*Trayahaihika*;’—‘*aihika*’ means ‘*wanted*;’ he who has what is wanted
for three days is ‘*trayahaihika*;’ which is the name given to one who
collects what is enough for the requirements of his family for three
days.

‘*Śvastana*’ is *what is needed for the morrow*; he who possesses this
is, as before, ‘*Śvastanika*;’ and this compound, with the negative
particle, gives the term ‘*aśvastanika*;’ ‘who does not possess enough
for the morrow.’ The meaning is that he should acquire what just
suffices for the time, what he earns he should spend all that the same
day.—(7)

The author next states the law relating to the options just mentioned:—


