+++
title = "009 षट्-कर्मैको भवत्य्"

+++
‘*From among these*’—from among the four kinds of householders, one
having a granary full of grains, and so forth,—‘*one follows the six
occupations*;’ *i.e*., the person with vast responsibilities described
above, follows all the six occupations.—“Which are these?”—These arc—(1)
gleanings, (2) pickings, (3) earning by begging, (4) earning without
begging, (5) agriculture and trade; ‘teaching,’ officiating at
sacrifices’ and ‘receiving gifts’ being included under ‘earning by
begging, and without begging.’ The man with a large family should have
recourse to all these occupations, for the due fulfilment of his daily
work; in fact he may have recourse to even agriculture and trade.

Some people explain the ‘six occupations’ of the present context as
standing for—‘Teaching, studying’ and the rest mentioned in Discourse I
(88). But this explanation is in-compatible with the context \[since
*Study, offering of sacrifices* and *making gifts* can nut be ‘means of
livelihood’\]; and further, there would be no point in prescribing
*study* and the rest here, they having been already enjoined elsewhere
(in 1.88 and in 10.75).

‘*Another*’—the second, who possesses a jar full of corns—‘*lives by
three*;’ the prefix ‘*pra*’ in ‘*pravartate*’ is superfluous;
‘*pravartate*’ standing for ‘*vartate*.’ Any three occupations of those
mentioned are meant here,—with the exception of Agriculture and Trade.

The person possessing only a jar full of corns is more commendable than
the former. Since it is going to be declared later on that—‘this means
of living has been deprecated by the good;’ this with reference to the
‘tending of cattle, trade,’ and so forth (8.102). Gautama has mentioned
(10.5-6)

‘Agriculture and Trade, not carried on by oneself, and money-lending’ as
permissible in normal times. But even when one carries on trade and
agriculture, not by oneself, but through others,—there is something
improper in this also; though the impropriety may be a small one.

‘*One lives with two*.’—Here also, leaving off ‘earning by begging,’ any
two of the six may be adopted. The acquiring of wealth *without begging*
also is permissible only to the extent of what may suffice for three
days.

‘*The fourth lives by Brahmasattra*.’—‘*Brahmasattra*’ stands for either
one of the two, ‘picking’ and ‘gleaning.’ These means of living are
called ‘*sattra*’ (Sacrificial Session), because they are carried on
continuously and are not to be finished on any one day. For this reason
they are called ‘*sattra*,’ specially as they have to be carried on
every day. The term ‘*brahma*’ is synonymous with ‘*Brāhmaṇas*;’ the
meaning being that this is a sacrifical session for Brāhmaṇas. From the
use of this term ‘*brahma*’ here, it follows that all that has been said
before this regarding the means of living, pertains to ‘*Brāhmaṇas*;’
those pertaining to the *Kṣatriya* and others will be described on
various occasions.

*Question*—“How can any living be possible by *pickings* and *gleanings*
alone? since it is only during the autumn and the summer that it is
possible for ears of corns to fall either in fields or in harvest-yards,
it might be said that ‘the man would earn summer-grains from the
summer-harvests, and the autumnal grains from the autumnal harvests.’
But in this way the man would have to collect grains lasting for six
months; and he could never be ‘one who does not possess enough for the
morrow.’ It might be argued that—‘it would be possible for the man to
pick and glean grains that may have fallen here and there (even apart
from harvesting).’ This is true; but the grain collected in this fashion
could never suffice for feeding.—‘When the man is picking and gleaning,
just as he will have collected enough, he will eat; it being impossible
for him to make a collection for five or more days. In the Mahābhārata,
the person who eats at the end of a fortnight has been called ‘one who
lives by pickings and gleanings which means that, under such
circumstances, the Householder has become the Hermit.’—But even so, this
would be incompatible with the character of ‘one who does not possess
enough for the morrow;’ as, under the circumstances mentioned, the man
would be ‘one who lives upon whatever he obtains,’ and *not*‘ one who
does not possess enough for the morrow.’ That man is called ‘one who
does not possess enough for the morrow,’ who earns everyday just enough
for the day, and spends it all on the same day, and does not keep
anything for the next day. If the daily ‘picking and gleaning’ does not
suffice for his daily feeding, how could he be ‘one who does not possess
enough for the morrow?’ How could such a person live and maintain his
wife and children?”

It is in view of these difficulties that some people offer another
explanation of the Text beginning with the words ‘*another lives by
three*’:—‘*By three*’—*i.e*., by officiating at sacrifices, by teaching
and by receiving gifts.—‘*By two*’—*i.e*., by officiating at sacrifices
and by teaching; the ‘receiving of gifts’ being precluded in view of
what is said (in 10.109) regarding ‘the receiving of gifts being
demeaning.’—‘*Brahma* - *sattra*’ is *teaching*; and this would be
enough for a living. The person described (in 4.10) as ‘one who lives by
picking and gleaning, etc.,’ must be different from the four described
in the present text.

On this point, we offer the following explanation:—‘*The person living
by picking*’ is one who obtains from several persons—taking ten or
twelve barley grains from each—just enough to serve for the day; while
one who obtains from each person enough for the day is called ‘one
living by gleanings.’ In another *Smṛti* text, this means of living has
been called ‘*Yāyāvara*.’ in view of this, such livelihood may pertain
to all time. Nor would there be any incompatibility between the
performance of the *Vaiśvadeva* and other rites and the maintaining of
wife and children; as for purposes of the former, a very small quantity
would be taken out of the alms obtained.—(9)


