+++
title = "010 वर्तयंश् च"

+++
The term ‘*pārvāyaṇāntīyāḥ*’ is to be expound as ‘those pertaining to
the *Parvas* and the *Ayanāntas*;’—the term being formed with the
reflexive ‘aṇ’ and the correlative ‘*cha*’ (according to Pāṇini,
4.2.114).

‘Iṣṭi-sacritices pertaining to the *Parvas* (the moonless and the
full-moon days) are the *Darśa-pūrṇamāsa* sacrifices; and that
‘pertaining to the solstices’ is the sacrifice called the ‘*Agrayaṇa*.’

The adding of ‘*only*’ precludes the voluntary sacrifices that are
performed with special ends in view. For the man here referred to, the
offering of the *Vaiśvadeva oblations* and the making of *Bali*
-offerings are not necessary every day; because he does not possess the
requisite amount of wealth. Hence the term ‘*only*’ precludes all the
more elaborate sacrifices.

“For that same reason, the *Agnihotra* also would not be possible for
the man; as wealth is needed for that also.”

Yes; but he could offer the fortnightly oblations.

“How would such a man maintain his wife?”

She also will have recourse to the same means of living (*i.e*., picking
and gleaning). In the event of the wife being disabled and unable to
carry on this method of livelihood, the husband would not be entitled to
the performance of the *Agnihotra* (or to the livelihood by pickings and
gleanings).

“How would the wife, in such cases, manage to live, when the man would
be keeping the *Cāndrāyaṇa* and such other fasts and observances?”

There is no room for this question, in face of the direction that ‘the
wife shall eat what is left by the guest and others.’

“In the event of the man not being able to offer the *Vaiśvadeva*
-offerings, the wife could not live upon her own private property; as it
has been laid down that both husband and wife shall live upon
‘remnants,’ Hence, the man shall make the *Vaiśvadeva* -offerings with
the help of his wife’s property; specially, as the use of the wife’s
property for religious purposes has been sanctioned by the scriptures.”

It is not so; under the circumstances mentioned, it is the *Agnihotra*,
and not the *Vaiśvadeva* -offering, that is religiously binding.

Or, even granting what you say. How would that woman live who has no
private property of her own?

From all this it follows that the man, whose wife is disabled, is not
entitled to have recourse to the ‘picking and gleaning’ method of
livelihood.

‘*Living*’—maintaining himself.—(10)


