+++
title = "011 न लोकवृत्तम्"

+++
That is called the ‘*worldly way*’ which is followed by ordinary people
wanting in moral strength;—such methods, for instance, as those of
hypocrisy and flattery—(describing the man from whom something is to be
gained as) ‘you are Viṣṇu, you are Brahmā! May you conquer and live
long!’ and so forth,—and also of reciting pleasing and jocular stories.

‘*For the sake of subsistence*.’—What is mentioned here should not be
done for the purpose of making a living; there is no harm in its being
done by way of politeness.

‘*Straightforward*.’—The man whose exterior is different from the
interior, is called ‘dishonest,’ ‘not straightforward;’ such a person.is
of a jealous temperament and shows it to persons who speak disagreeable
words to him.

‘*Sincere*.’—That man is called ‘insincere,’ ‘hypocritical,’ who
performs the *Agnihotra*, for obtaining popularity and thereby receiving
presents and gifts, and not with a view to carrying out the scriptural
injunctions regarding it.

Though ‘straightforwardness’ and the rest are qualities belonging to the
soul, yet they are here figuratively attributed to the ‘Life.’

‘*Straightforward, sincere and pure*’— The ‘purity’ here meant consists
in its not being mixed up with the two methods of livelihood described
above, and also in its being free from the aforesaid defects.

Though what was meant could be conveyed by means of only one of the
three words, yet, in view of metrical exigencies, the author has made
use of three words; such, use being analogous to such expressions as
‘*go-balīvarda*’ (where the *go* is the same as the *balīvarda*).

How can there be any such expression as ‘*live the life of the
Brāhmaṇa*,’ ‘*Brāhmaṇajīvikām jīvet*, ‘when the root *to live* is
intransitive? Why, too, should the same root (*to live, jīva*) be used
twice (once in ‘*jīvet*’ and again in ‘*jīvikām*’)? Certainly, the
relation of cause and effect is never found to be expressed by such
expressions, as ‘*gamanam gacchet*,’ ‘should *go* the *going*.’”

Our answer is as follows:—The relation of cause and effect is based upon
the relation of general and particular, and hence there is nothing
incongruous in this. We have such usage in expressions like ‘*aśvapoṣam*
*puṣṭaḥ*,’ ‘fattened like the fattening of the horse,’ Further, the root
‘*jīva*,’ ‘to live,’ also denotes the act of *living* as part of the act
of *acting up to* the *performance*; and in this sense it is
*transitive* also. So that there is nothing objectionable in the
expression used; the term ‘*jīvet*,’ ‘*should live*,’ being explained as
*should act up to*,’ for the sake of subsistence.—(11)


