+++
title = "013 अतो ऽन्यतमया"

+++
The term ‘*means of livelihood*’ stands for the rule regarding
subsistence. Hence, ‘*by any one*’ does not imply that the man’s life
should be entirely dependent upon that one; because the rules do not say
that he who has recourse to one living should not have recourse to
another. It is for this reason,too, that the mail subsisting by a number
of means of living, or the man who has inherited his father’s property
(and hence does not stand in need of the modes of living just
described), does not cease to be entitled to the keeping of the
observances. If this were not so, then it would be absolutely necessary
for the man to adopt only *one* mode of living.

‘*These observances*.’—‘Observance’ means *mental determination*, in the
form—‘such and such an act is enjoined by the scriptures,—I should do
this—or I should not do that.’

‘*Conducive to heaven, longevity and fame*.’— Some people have held that
this mentions the results actually following from the keeping of the
observances; and hence it is only persons desiring these results, that
have to keep the observances.

This, however, is not right. As if this were so, then the observances
would cease to be obligatory; and this would be incompatible with the
term ‘*nitya*,’ ‘daily,’ ‘always,’ occurring in the next verse. Further,
the Veda has indicated the obligatory character of these
observances:—‘By not keeping these, one becomes beset with sin,’
Further, if Heaven and the rest were construed as something desired,
they could not attain the position of being qualifications of the
persons entitled to the observances.—(13)


