+++
title = "018 वयसः कर्मणो"

+++
‘*Vayasaḥ*,’ ‘*with age*,’— the genitive ending denotes relationship
to^(‘)conformity.’

‘*Veṣavāgbuddhi*.’—this is a copulative compound.

‘*Sārūpyam*.’—the affix ‘*ṣyan*’ has the reflexive force.

Thus the meaning comes to be as follows:—

Dress and the rest should be kept in due conformity with age and other
things.

‘*Sārūpya*,’ means here *conformity*, *compatibility*; any other kind of
‘*Sārūpya*,’ ‘similarity,’—such as that of figure and the like—being
impossible in this case.

‘*Dress’ stands* for the disposition of the hair, of ornaments, and so
forth. Fop instance, during boy-hood, hair is to be worn in tufts;
during youth, it shall be worn in curls and such other shapes; while in
old age it shall be either worn clotted, or shall be clean shaven.

‘*Speech*’ also should be in conformity with age. Similarly,
‘*thoughts*’ also; that is, during early life the man should think of
the triad (of wealth, pleasure and religious merit); but as he grows
old, his thoughts should rest mainly on Religious Merit.

Dress should also be in conformity with one’s occupation, as also with
one’s wealth; it should be in conformity with one’s family also. So that
such things as painting of the teeth and dressing of the hair, etc.,
even though otherwise flagrant, cease to be so when they are in keeping
with one’s occupation etc.

It has been said that the present verse deals with ordinary worldly
activity. That is to say, it does not lay down an Injunction;—the
injunctive portion of it having been already got out from other sources.
All that the verse does is to describe the ordinary usage of the world;
the sense being that if one behaves in accordance with this, one follows
the ways of the world, and hence does not become unpopular among
men.—(18)


