+++
title = "022 एतान् एके"

+++
‘*Some persons*’—Householders—‘*Conversant with the ordinances relating
to sacrifices, offer these great sacrifices into the sense-organs*;’
*i.e*., they accomplish their performance in this manner.

Who are these people?

‘*Those who do not cherish any desires*;’—*i.e*., those who have no
desire for acquiring wealth, who have renounced the Vedic rituals.

Some people regard this verse as enjoining what is to be done by the
person living on ‘pickings and gleanings,’ as also by the lame and the
maimed,- That such persons also may marry wives is going to be declared
later on in 9-20. Such persons are not entitled to the regular
performance of the Five Sacrifices; for the simple reason that they can
never possess wealth sufficient for the performance of the sacrifices;
since they are to earn only enough for subsistence, and not any more
than that, which could be used in the performance of sacrifices.

The root ‘*hu*’ (in ‘*juhvati*,’ ‘offer,’) indicates the act of *doing*
in general. For the ‘sacrifice,’ which is a particular act, can never be
the object of ‘*homa*,’ which is another act; there can be no such
expression as ‘cooks the cooking;’ we have such expressions as ‘does the
cooking,’ ‘does the sacrifice.’ It is only when verbs stand in need of
objects in general that they get, for their auxiliaries, substances and
their operations; *e.g*., we have such expressions as ‘desires to eat,’
‘he is able to eat,’ ‘know to eat;’ and the particular (the part) is
often found to be used as indicative of the general (the whole), when,
for instance, one speaks of ‘the ox’ as to be examined ‘by its foot.’

Some people explain the ‘offering into the sense-organs’ to mean their
*restraining*.

Others, again, have explained it to mean what has been described in the
Upaniṣad (Chāndogya), where it is said that the first mouthful that one
eats in the morning and in the evening, should be put into the mouth as
an ‘oblation,’ with the formula ‘*prāṇāya svāhā*,’ and so forth.

Others, again, explain that the ‘offering’ here spoken of is the same as
what is enjoined in the next verse as a form of ‘worship;’ and it is
thus that the two verses become construed together.

“But, in the next verse, the life-breath is laid down as to be offered
into speech, and not into the *sense-organ* (as in the present verse).”

There is no force in the objection. The mention of the ‘sense-organs’
simply indicates the spiritual character of the offering; what is meant
is that this offering does not require any external accessories.—(22)


