+++
title = "024 ज्ञानेनैवाऽपरे विप्रा"

+++
‘*By these sacrifices*,’—by the Five great sacrifices under
treatment—‘*they sacrifice*,’—i.e., accomplish their duty in relation to
them. It is in this sense that there is difference in the denotations of
the two terms, ‘sacrifice’ and ‘sacrifices,’—between which the text
speaks of the relation of cause and effect; just as we have in the
expression, ‘he who sacrifices with the *Agniṣṭoma* sacrifice.’

*Question*:—“ How can the *sacrifice* be accomplished by means of
*knowledge*? *Sacrifice* consists in the act of offering a certain
material for the benefit of a deity; and certainly *knowledge* is not of
the nature of such au act.”

Our answer is as follows s—By the term ‘sacrifice’ in the present verse
what is meant is *the accomplishment of the act of sacrificing*.

“If such accomplishment were brought about by *knowledge* alone, for
what purpose would there be the performance of the act itself? The
performance of an act cannot be entirely objectless. If your idea be
that—‘since the Veda speaks of the reward of an act accruing also to the
man having *knowledge* of it, there is no need of the actual performance
at all,’—this cannot be right; as the passage referred to is only a
commendatory description subserving the purposes of some other passage.”

To this we make the following reply:—We have already pointed out that
the persons entitled to the performance of the sacrifices in question
are those that have realised the true nature of the Soul and are
entirely free from desires. And it is these persons that are spoken of
as ‘possessing knowledge,’ and not those who have the knowledge *of the
act*. What the present text means is that such persons, having given up
the Veda, but continuing in the house, should accomplish the great
sacrifices in this manner. That is to say, it is only by means of
knowledge of the Soul that such persons can accomplish such sacrifices
as can be performed only with the help of wealth (which these men have
renounced); but, as regards the two duties of Teaching and offering
water-libations, it is going to be declared in Discourse VI, that these
can be accomplished only by the actual performance of the acts (and not
by knowledge of the Soul).

The text adds a commendatory declaration, by way of pointing out the
reason for what has been said above.

‘*Having its root in Knowledge*,’—*i.e*., that act which has its root in
Knowledge. Knowledge stands at the root of all acts; an ignorant person
cannot perform any act at all. This is what has been said in such
passages—as—‘the learned man sacrifices.’

‘*Looking with the eye of Knowledge*.’—The Knowledge being as if it were
the Eye; just as colour is perceived bymeans of the eye, so is the
matter known by means of knowledge.

‘*Knowledge*’ here does not stand for the *Veda* alone—(24).


