+++
title = "025 अग्निहोत्रञ् च"

+++
The terms ‘*agnihotra*’ and the rest are found used in the Veda and in
the Gṛhyasūtra texts, in the sense of particular rites; and these rites,
along with their procedure, are prescribed in these texts. And it is to
these rites that the present verse makes a *reference*; it does not
contain the original injunction of the rites; specially, as it speaks of
their *form* only; *i.e*, all that the present verse mentions is the
necessity of performing the act of *offering* only,—and it does not
mention either the material to be offered, or the deity to whom it is to
be offered. And yet the names ‘*Agnihotra*’ and the rest, stand in need
of the mention of detailed particulars; hence it follows that what is
implied is that the detailed particulars of these rites are to be learnt
from other treatises.

“If that be so, then, since the necessity of performing the rites also
could be learnt from those same treatises, there is no use for the
present text at all.”

The use of the present text lies in adjusting the necessity of
performing these acts, in the case of persons who have renounced Vedic
rituals, with the form of worship laid down in the present context; the
sense being that just as, according to what has been said regarding some
people offering ‘the life-breath into speech,’ and so forth, the Five
Great Sacrifices are performed by such men, by means of *Knowledge*
alone,—so are the sacrificial rites mentioned in the present verse also.
Then again, what sort of objection is this that you urge, when you
ask—‘Why should there he a repeated mention?’ As a matter of fact, in
the case of the Vedic and Smṛti texts, it is found that what is said in
one part of it is said again in another part; and all this would be open
to objection (according to you). Lastly, we have already provided the
general answer to such objections;—*viz*., that since the persons meant
to be enlightened are many, the texts cannot be regarded as needless
repetitions at all. Just as, by reason of the perceiv-ers being many,
there are many organs of perception, and all men cannot see with one eye
only, and there is need of several such organs,—so also is the case with
the diverse Vedic and Smṛti texts.

The question might be raised—“Why should the mere name of the rites be
mentioned?”

There is nothing objectionable in this also. Since the procedures as
laid down in the several Vedic texts are divergent, which particular
procedure could the verse mention? If it were to mention all, there
would be prolexity; and if it were to mention any *one* only, this would
involve the abandoning of the others.

“Even so, the omission is open to objection.”

But we have already pointed out that the present verse contains only a
*reference*, and not an *Injunction*. It is only an Injunction, against
which the objection can be urged that—‘the act being already enjoined
elsewhere, why should it be enjoined again?’

‘*At the beginning and end of dag and night*;’—this is not meant to be
construed respectively. What is meant is—‘at the beginning of day and
beginning of night,’ and ‘at the end of day and end of night;’ and by
this, *morning and evening* are meant. For those who follow the practice
of making the offerings *after sunrise*, the offering shall be made ‘at
the beginning of day;’ while for those who follow the practice of making
the offerings *before sunrise*, it shall be made ‘at the end of night.’

The term ‘*dyu*’ here is synonymous with ‘*Divasa*,’ ‘day.’

‘*Always*,’—*i.e*., throughout one’s life, one should offer these
morning and evening libations.

In connection with ‘*darśena*,’ it is necessary to supply the root
‘*yajeta*’; as the original injunction of the *Darśa-sacrifice* does not
contain the verb, ‘*juhuyāt*,’—the injunction being in the form
‘*darśena yajeta*;’ and the prfesent verse makes only a reiterative
reference to what is prescribed in that injunction; and thus (it being
impossible to construe ‘*darśena*’ with the verb ‘*juhuyāt*’ in the
verse) it becomes necessary to supply the verb ‘*yajeta*.’ For this same
reason, though the text does not make any specification, the phrase,
‘*at the end of half-month*’ should be understood to mean that the
*Darśa* is to be performed at the end of the darker fortnight, and the
*Paurṇamāsa* (*Pūrṇamāsa*) at the end of the brighter fortnight. Says
the *Śruti*—‘One should perform the *Darśa* sacrifice on the Moonless
Day and the *Paurṇamāsa* on the Full Moon Day.’—(25)


