+++
title = "026 सस्यान्ते नवसस्येष्ट्या"

+++
The term ‘*sasya*,’ ‘*grains*,’ stands for the *Vrīhi* and other
grains;—‘*end*’ means *exhaustion*. The meaning is that when the
previous supply of grains has become exhausted, he shall perform the
‘New-Harvest Sacrifice,’ *i.e*., the *Āgrayaṇa* sacrifice.

This does not mean that either the exhaustion of the previous supply of
grain, or the coming in of the new harvest, is the reason or occasion
for the performance of the *Āgrayaṇeṣṭi*; what is meant is that the
eating of new grain is prohibited, until one has performed the
*Āgrayaṇeṣṭi*. This is what has been said in the following text—‘Without
having offered the sacrifice, one should not eat new grain.’ On these
grounds, some people explain the verse to mean that ‘since one cannot
eat new grains without having performed the *Āgrayaṇa* sacrifice, one
shall perform this sacrifice.’

But, according to this explanation, it would mean that—if there has been
no previous grain-supply, or, if there is no fresh grain-supply, or, if
one has no desire to eat new grains, it would not he necessary to
perform the *Āgrayaṇa* sacrifice. If the ‘end of previous supply’ be
taken to be indicative of the coming in of the new supply \[and there
were nothing to prohibit the eating of new grains before performing the
sacrifice\], then it becomes possible to eat the new grain without
having performed the sacrifice.

For these reasons, we conclude that here we have two declarations—(*a*)
‘he shall not eat without having performed the sacrifice’ (next verse)
and (*b*) ‘at the end of the grains, &c.’ (present verse). The ‘end of
grains’ is meant to stand for the coining of the new grain; since the
*coming in* is certain, and as such can serve as the occasion for the
sacrifice. The ‘end’ or ‘exhaustion’ (of the former supply), on the
other hand, is uncertain; since, in the case of rich men, there are
supplies that may last for three years. It is for these reasons that the
author of the *Sūtra* has declared—

‘Without having performed the *Agnihotra*, one shall not eat out of the
harvest,’ and ‘When one is satisfied for the year, one shall perform the
Āgrayaṇa,’—and, further, ‘The new-grain sacrifice is to be doue in the
autumn this last laying down the time for the sacrifice. So that the
man, for whom there is no ‘end of the former supply,’ will observe the
rule regarding autumn being the time for the sacrifice; which will not
be done by another person (for whom there is ‘end of former supply’). In
this way, both the declarations are found to have their use. If this
were not the meaning, then the author would have said simply—‘On the
coming of the new harvest, he shall perforin the New-Harvest Sacrifice.’
Since, however, the author says—‘without having performed the
New-Harvest Sacrifice, one shall not eat of the new grains,’ it follows
that even when the new harvest has come iu, if the man happen to have
old corn left, he may wait-till the autumn (for the performance of the
sacrifice); and, since the coming in of the new harvest forms the
occasion for the sacrifice, the performance of the *Āgrayaṇa* is
obligatory, even when the man has no desire to eat new grains.

‘*At the end of the seasons*’—According to the theory that ‘the *season*
constitutes the year,’ what this portion of the text lays down is the
performance of the *Cāturmāsya* sacrifices; in fact, it is these
sacrifices that are referred to by the term ‘*adhvara*,’

‘*End of the solstices*’ means ‘beginning of the two solstices’;—the two
solstices being the ‘northern’ and the ‘southern.’ At these, one shall
perform the ‘Animal-Sacrifice,’ twice during the year. The author of the
Sutra has said—‘This sacrifice is either six monthly or yearly.’

‘*At the end of the year*.’—The term ‘*samā*’ is synonymous with ‘year;’
and the ‘end’ of this is the *śiśira*, the later winter season. The
present verse does not mean that the Soma-sacrifice shall be performed
during the winter; what is meant is that—‘when the winter has passed and
the spring has arrived, the Soma-sacrifice shall be performed.’ Says the
*Śruti*—‘At each spring-season, one shall perform the *Jyotiṣṭoma*
sacrifice.’

What the whole text means is that these constitute the obligatory rites,
and, as such, shall be performed, somehow or the other, by even those
who have renounced Vedic rituals.—(26).


