+++
title = "032 शक्तितो ऽपचमानेभ्यो"

+++
‘*Those who do not cook their own food*.’—Students and Renunciates are
meant,—say some.

But this is not right, as gifts to students and hermits has already been
laid down as an obligatory duty. Hence, what is meant by the present
text is that one shall give as much as one can to the poor and also to
impostors (who are unable to cook for themselves). That is, his giving
shall be in due consideration of what he can give and of the quantity of
food cooked in his house. Since the recipients are described as doing no
‘cooking,’ it follows that *cooked food* is to be given to them.

‘*Apportionment*.’—He shall distribute out of his other belongings
also,—such as fuel, clothing, medicines and other useful things.

‘*Among ail beings*’—The term ‘beings’ stands for all living things in
the world; just as it is used in such declarations as ‘*gāyatri* is all
this *being*.’ Since inanimate beings cannot be helped in the same
manner as living beings, this term here stands for *conscious, living*,
beings only. Thus, according to the view that plants are capable of
growing and endowed with consciousness, it would follow that some
apportionment of wealth should be made for providing for the watering of
plants, &c., also.

The term ‘*bhūta*,’ ‘*being*,’ has many meanings: (1) In some cases, it
means *the principal thing, e.g*., in such expressions as ‘this Brāhmaṇa
woman is *the being* in this house;’ (2) sometimes it means ‘*ghost*;’
*e.g*., ‘this person is obsessed by a being;’ (3) sometimes it means the
*contrary thing*; *e.g*., ‘he says, what is *bhūta*;’ (4) sometimes it
is used in the sense of the past,—*e g*., ‘this verb denotes the
*bhūta*;’ (5) sometimes it stands for particular deities,—*e.g*.,
‘offering to the *bhūtas*;’ (6) sometimes it stands for all conscious
beings,—*e.g*., ‘one should not kill *bhūtas*;’ (7) sometimes it denotes
*approach*,—‘our Moon is *bhūta*, become, large;’ (8) sometimes it
denotes similitude,—*e.g*., ‘this is *kāvya*—*bhūta*, as if it were a
poem;’ and (9) sometimes it means *coming into existence*,—*e.g*.,
‘Devadatta’s son is *bhūta*, born.’ What the term means in the present
context we have already explained.

The Dative ending in ‘*bhūtebhyaḥ*’ denotes ‘*for the sake of*.’

‘*Without detriment*;’—so that no suffering be caused to his own family;
that is, he shall keep back enough for his own family, and then, with
the remainder, he shall ‘make the apportionment.’ This is what is taught
also in 11-10.—(32)


