+++
title = "033 राजतो धनम्"

+++
The term ‘*king*’ here stands for all wealthy castes; as the author is
going to declare later on (10-113)—‘The king should be begged by persons
suffering from want and seeking for wealth and metals.’ Thus the term
‘*rājan*,’ ‘*king*,’ in its primary denotation signifies the *Kṣatriya*
caste; but on the strength of what we see in other treatises, we take it
to mean here the ‘king of men,’ specially, as kings of men are wealthy.
Thus, what the text means is that—‘gifts’ should be received from such
persons as are extremely rich in the possession of cows and bulls, goat
and sheep, cash and grains. In doing this, the man shall he also
observing the rule that ‘he should live without causing pain to any
one;’ as such people do not feel any pain in making gifts; while if one
were to beg from men with small wealth, it would be open to objection.

If the term ‘*rājan*’ were taken in its primary sense of the *Kṣatriya
caste*, the receiving of gifts from *Brāhmaṇas* and others would become
forbidden; and this would be against the teaching of all *Smṛtis*. In
another *Smṛti*, we read—‘One shall receive gifts from commended
twice-born people, and uncooked food also from a *Śūdra* who is
submissive,’ In prohibitions also, we find the term ‘*rājan*’ used in
the sense of ‘king of men;’ *e,g*., in such passages as—‘One shall not
accept gifts from the Rājā,’ where the prohibition cannot apply to the
*Kṣatriya caste*, since the text subsequently adds—^(‘)or from one not
born of *Kṣatriya* parents’ (4-84). It is for this reason that this
latter verse cannot be taken as forbidding the acceptance of gifts from
the Kṣatriya, because, if that were meant, the text could not add ‘from
one not born of Kṣatriya parents;’ for those ‘not born of Kṣatriya
parents’ can never be ‘Kṣatriyas,’ For these reasons, the conclusion on
this point is as follows:—‘gifts shall be accepted from such Kṣatriya
kings as behave according to the scriptures, and not from others,’

‘*From one at whose sacrificial rites he officiates*, *or from his
pupil*.’— The Genitive ending is used in reference to the ‘wealth.’ Or,
we may read the phrase as ending with the ‘Tasi
affix’—*yājyāntevāsitaḥ*.’ Since both these names are based upon the
doing of certain acts, the meaning is that—‘he shall live by the
occupations of Teaching and Officiating at Sacrifices.’

Others explain as follows:—The receiving of gifts from others would
constitute a minor sin, and other means of acquiring wealth, such as
theft and the like, are distinctly forbidden. The upshot is that he
shall worship God and live upon gifts made through love, and also by
pronouncing ‘*svasti*’ (at sacrificial performances); but in no case
shall he do service; as that means of livelihood has been already
forbidden. Thus he may accept gifts from such of his sacrificial clients
as have received benefit at his hands, even though he may not be
officiating at their sacrifices at the time; for even though the actual
relationship (of priest and client) may have ceased, their duty towards
each other remains.

‘*Suffering*.’—This means that gifts shall not be sought, if the man has
inherited some property; as it has been declared (in verse 15 above)
that—‘nor when wealth is already there.’

What is said here is not something to be done in abnormal times of
distress; as mere ‘suffering’ does not constitute ‘distress;’ all that
it means is ‘absence of earned wealth;’ and it would be a case of
‘distress,’ only if the adopting of any of the sanctioned means of
living were impossible, or if all one’s property were destroyed. Even
though he may be possessed of much cash and grains, his grain-supply may
become exhausted in times of famine; and, in such cases, if
entertainment as a guest would be impossible, and the man would be
suffering from hunger, this would constitute ‘distress;’ while, if the
man were not pining from hunger, this would be simple ‘suffering.’ Such
is the difference between the two (*distress* and *suffering*).

‘*Not from others*.’—That is, he shall receive no gifts from persons
with little wealth, or from one who receives no benefit from the person
(begging).—(33)


