+++
title = "036 वैणवीन् धारयेद्"

+++
The ‘holding’ of the sacred thread and of the ear-rings, would consist
in their being worn on the body; and each of these should be worn on
that part of the body for which it is fitted; for instance, the
ear-rings shall be worn in the ears, and the sacred thread over the
body; the term ‘*kuṇḍala*’ ‘ear-ring,’ being the name of the ornament
for the ear; and the name ‘sacred thread’ being applied to the thread
worn over the neck and passing under the right arm.

The stick and the rest are to be always kept on the body, in view of the
visible purposes served by them. For instance, the stick serves as a
support when the man is tired, and it also serves the purpose of driving
away the bull and other aggressive animals.

Inasmuch as ‘cleaning’ has been laid down as to be done with water taken
out of a reservoir, the present text restricts the vessel to the
‘water-pot’ definitely; and this precludes the jar and other vessels,
which serve the same purpose (of holding water), and not such other
things as the ear-ring, the bracelet, and so forth.

Thus it is that the water-pot has to be kept filled with water, for the
purpose of removing such uncleanliness as may be caused by contamination
during the act of paying the calls of nature, and which is capable of
being removed by water. It has been said that—‘in matters within one’s
power, one should not remain unclean for a single moment.’ The meaning
of the phrase, ‘in matters within one’s power,’ is as follows If the
water held before has been used up, and then there happens to come about
such further uncleanliness as is caused by spitting, and the like, then,
if water be not available, there would be no harm in the man remaining
unclean for sometime (till he can obtain the requisite water); but even
so, in connection with the calls of nature, our author is going to
prescribe bathing under 12. 22, where it is laid down that ‘the man
should dip into water, with all his clothing.’

Precise rules regarding the means of cleaning have been laid down in
another *Smṛti* text. Says the revered *Vaśiṣṭha* (12-15-17)—“For water,
hand and wood, Fire has been declared to be the means of cleaning;
hence, having washed the water-pot with the hands and with water, the
offering that one makes, has been declared by manu Prajāpati to
constitute *Paryagnikaraṇa* (Fire-purfication). The person knowning the
laws of cleanliness should rinse his mouth after having done all
necessary acts.’

Baudhayāna also has said—after having begun with the words, ‘Now the
water-pot is to be held,’—‘Having become clean, and when one washes the
water-pot, this washing of things constitutes *Paryagnikaraṇa*
(Purification by fire); even in his previous condition, the man shall
leave off the water-pot, on account of its being unclean; but the
learned shall not decry it, nor censure it, nor regard it as
objectionable.’

The name ‘*kamaṇḍalu*,’ ‘*water-pot*,’ is based upon the particular
shape, and not upon any particular species or kind, of its material. So
that, whether it be made of eathernware or of gold, or of silver,—the
cleaning, in all cases, is to be done in the manner just described, and
in the manner that has been prescribed in connection with the original
substance of which it may be made. But, on its coining into contact with
urine and such things, the purification is to done in the manner laid
down in connection with the constituent material. In all cases, the
hands are to be washed, because of their being in contact with. such
sources of contamination as the man in an unclean state.

Says Gautama also—‘Having placed the pot somewhere near him, for the
purpose of purification,’ *etc, etc*., So, in the present verse, what is
meant by ‘holding’ is keeping near oneself, and not the actual holding
in the hand.

‘*Veda*’ is the name of ‘Kuśa-handful.’ The use for this consists in the
‘touching of the organs,’ which has been laid down as to be done with
‘Kuśa-blades.’

The upshot of all this is that things that serve transcendental purposes
shall be held on the body at all times, while those that serve only
visible purposes are to be kept only when need arises.

‘*Bright*. ’— Beautiful, in shape, and also by the burnishing of the
gold by heating and polishing.—(37)


