+++
title = "043 नाऽश्नीयाद् भार्यया"

+++
Under 5.130, it is said that ‘the mouth of women is always pure,’ and
again one is advised to avoid ‘the leavings of women and Śūdras.’ Both
of these are true within their own limited sphere. When the mouth is
said to be ‘ever pure,’ it refers to the time of sexual intercourse, in
view of what has been declared in another *Smṛti* regarding ‘the purity
of the woman during sexual intercourse.’ From this it follows that the
prohibition applies to such a woman with whom one can never have such
intercourse; *e.g*., the mother, the sister, and the like. Specially
because what is prohibited here is not simply *affectionate treatment*,
but the entertaining of thoughts of love and longing preceded by the
erotic sentiment. Hence it follows that the ‘purity’ pertains to woman
related to such intercourse, and the prohibition to those not so
related.

The above considerations would give rise to the notion that one may eat
with one’s wife, who serves the purposes of sexual intercourse; hence
with a view to preclude such an idea, the text proceeds to declare—‘*he
shall not eat with his wife*.’

“As a matter of fact, what has been said regarding the ‘purity’ of the
woman’s mouth, refers to a particular form of advances that the man in
love generally makes, so that the purity can refer only to the act of
*kissing*; and there is no possibility of its making any one inclined to
eat with his wife.”

But the reiteration contained in the present verse is meant to show the
form of the *observance*; which means that one should make a life-long
vow that ‘he shall never eat with his wife.’

The ‘eating together’ that is mentioned here as the object of
prohibition is—(*a*) eating out of the same dish, (*b*) eating at the
same time and (*c*) eating at the same place. So that there can. be no
room for the idea that the pohibition applies to ‘leavings.’ That the
meaning of ‘eating *together*’ is as just mentioned we gather from other
Smṛti texts and from usage; as for ‘leavings,’ this term can only mean
what has been left.’ Thus, then, when it is said that—‘his friends and
others he shall feed *with his wife*’ (3.113),—it is clear that what is
meant is, *not* that they shall eat out *of the same dish* with the
wife, but that they shall eat at the same time and place with her.
\[Hence, it must be these latter that are forbidden by the present
verse\].

Others have explained ‘leavings’ as something different—as what has been
left after one has eaten. So that it would not be a case of ‘eating the
leavings’ when one eats in the same dish with one’s wife.

According to this explanation, what would be the object of the
prohibition would be *the eating with Śrūdas* (*Śūdras*?) only; and this
would involve the abandoning of universally accepted notions, under
which mere touch (of the Śūdra) is regarded as constituting ‘*ucciṣṭa*,’
‘leaving;’ and this touch is present also when two persons are ‘eating
together.’

Some people hold that what is forbidden is eating at the same time and
place; that this is so, follows from the fact that the teaching herein
contained is with a view to a visible purpose; the prohibition therefore
being based upon the fact that men differ in their nature, some men are
not pleased with their wife eating large quantities, while there are
others who, on finding their wife eating little, think that she is
deceiving him by eating little in his presence.

Similar to the above are the other restrictions: ‘*he shall not look at
her while she is eating*;’ if he sees her while eating, when she may be
opening her mouth wide, she may look ugly and thus fail to please her
husband.

‘*Snoring*’—is the sound made by the nose filled with the wind passing
down from the head. Here also the disfiguring of the face is likely to
make the husband displeased.

‘*Yawning*’—the prolonged breathing out of air with the mouth, or the
spreading out of the body and limbs. This also is undesirable on the
said grounds.

‘*Sitting at her ease*’—with hair diśevelled, with the body thrown upon
the ground.—(43)


