+++
title = "062 न भुञ्जीतोद्धृत-स्नेहम्"

+++
He shall not eat anything from which oil has been extracted; for
instance, the oil-cake, juices and meat. Later on (5.24-25), the Author
shall provide a counter-exception in the case of sacrificial remnants
and preparations of milk kept over-night; and the plural number (in the
term ‘*preparations* of milk’) is used in consideration of the large
number of much preparations as whey, coagulated milk and so forth;
though curd alone is the direct preparation of milk. But if curd alone
were meant to be included in the counter-exception, then the Author
would have mentioned that alone by name. So that curd can never be
regarded as ‘kept over-night.’ From this it follows that the prohibition
contained in the present verse does not apply to whey, coagulated milk
and such other preparations of milk.

‘*He shall not commit gluttony*’—Eat too much. The stomach is divided
into three parts: one part is to be filled with solid food, another with
water and other liquids, and the third is to be left empty for the
moving about of the juices; it is in this manner that one should eat;
and this means that he shall not commit gluttony.

‘*Very early*’—*i.e*., just at sun-rise, one should not eat. For weaker
people, the proper time for eating is after the expiry of three hours in
the morning, and for other persons it is midday.

‘*Not very late in the evening*’—*i.e*., one shall not eat at sunset;
‘*nor in the evening, if the has eaten in the morning*’— to his fill.
This means that at both times one should eat while some hunger is still
left. This is what has been thus asserted—‘Morning and evening are the
two times for eating, ordained by the gods. But if one has eaten to his
fill in the morning, then he shall not eat in the evening.’

Or, the text may be explained in the following manner:—‘He shall not eat
to his fill both in the morning and in the evening.’ It is in view of
this that Yājñavalkya (Acāra, 114) has advised light food in the
evening.—(62)


