+++
title = "080 न शूद्राय"

+++
No advice shall be offered to a Śūdra regarding his welfare or
otherwise, regarding matters temporal or spiritual; that is to say, one
should not become an adviser to a Śūdra.

This prohibition pertains to being an adviser as a means of livelihood;
there would be nothing wrong in offering advice in a purely friendly
manner; in fact, there may be hereditary friendship between Brāhmaṇas
and Śūdras; and certainly through friendship advice for welfare is
always offered. Further, it has been declared (by Manu himself) that the
Brāhmaṇa should be *friendly* to all castes—‘the Brāhmaṇa is one who is
friendly to all.’

Some people offer the following explanation:—

“From what is said in other texts, it is better to take the present
verse to mean that advice shall not be offered *unasked*; as declared
above (in 2. 110),—‘He should not say anything to any one without being
asked.’”

This explanation, however, is not right. What has been said under 2,110,
is in connection with the reading of the

Veda; the sense being, ‘if a man is found to be committing a mistake in
accent, or syllable, or in some other detail, one should not tell him,
unless one is asked, that he had murdered the Text.’ Similarly, in
connection with the enumeration of persons who shall not be taught the
Veda, it has been said—‘One shall not speak unasked;’ and this also
means that, in the case of persons other than his own pupils, one should
not say anything, even if he finds them reciting the Veda wrongly,
either as regards accent or syllables.

‘*Nor the leavings*’—The term ‘*ucchiṣṭa*’ denotes *impurity, specially
in relation to food*. One who has paid calls of nature, is also called
‘*ucchiṣṭa*,’ ‘impure,’ till he has washed; as we shall explain under
the text—‘One who is *impure, ucchiṣṭa*, shall not touch with his hand,
&c.’ (142). But, as a rule, the term is used in connection with *food*.
So that, while one is eating, the food that comes into contact with his
mouth, whether within the mouth or outside, becomes known as ‘impure.’
It is in this sense that under 5.141—where it is said—‘nor the hairs of
the moustache entering the mouth,’—everything, with the exception of the
hairs of the moustache, is said to become ‘impure.’ It is in this sense
also that the eater, the thing eaten and the dish containing the food,
all come to be called ‘impure’; ‘*ucchiṣṭa*.’

In some cases, the word is also used in the sense of ‘what has been left
unused,’ ‘remnant,’ ‘leaving;’; *e.g*., in the passage—‘The leavings of
the substance offered are to be given as the fee.’ Thus, it is on the
basis of usage that the term ‘*ucchiṣṭa*’ is applied to the food that
has been served in the dish for a particular person,. and out of which a
little has been eaten by him; and the clean food that is simply placed
in the dish and not even touched by the eater,—this also is rejected, on
the strength of usage, as ‘impure,’ on the ground of its being in
contact with the dish which is in contact with that food out of which
the person has eaten (and which therefore has become a ‘leaving’). It is
in accordance with this that each passages as—(*a*) ‘the leavings of
food should be given’ (10.125), and (*b*) ‘leavings shall not be given,
etc.’—which contain an injunction and a prohibition, respectively—are
taken as pertaining to the same thing, and as applying to the ‘true’ and
the ‘untrue’ *Śūdra*, respectively, and also as referring to the
remnants of different kinds of materials offered (and hence not being
mutually contradictory). Or, the meaning (of the prohibition) may be
that what has been left in the pot, after the guests and others have
eaten, and which is as good as ‘stale’ and ‘leavings,’ should not be
given to the *Śūdra*. It is argued that, since the term is found to be
used (in 10.125) along with ‘torn clothes,’ this latter explanation is
the right one to be accepted. Further, since the root ‘*śiṣ*’ (from
which ‘*ucchiṣṭa*’ has been derived) denotes ‘other than what has been
used,’ and the preposition (‘*ut*’) has to be construed in accordance
with that signification,—there need be nothing incongruous in construing
this passage also in the same sense as the passage ‘the leavings of the
substance offered are to be given as the fee.’ In this manner, there is
no incompatibility between these two *Smṛti-* texts (‘the leavings of
the food shall be given’ and ‘the leavings should not be given’); though
in most passages the term is restricted, by convention, to people who
stand in need of washing. As for the declaration that ‘the method of
purification is like that of the Vaiśya, etc.’ (5.139)—this refers to
the *Slave-Śūdra*; and the term ‘*ucchiṣṭa*’ in this passage is
understood to mean ‘the leavings of food,’ as we shall show under this
passage.

‘*Nor what has been prepared as an offering to the Gods*’—The term
‘*haviṣ-kṛtam*’ means ‘*haviṣe kṛtam*,’ ‘prepared as an offering to the
Gods.’ The compound is an irregular one; the compounding of the
participle ‘*kṛṭa*’ or ‘*kalpita*,’ with the noun ending in the Dative,
having the sense of ‘for the purpose of,’ is not sanctioned.

According to the maxim of the ‘stick and the cake’—by which, when the
stick on which cakes are hanging is brought down by rats, we are led to
believe that the cakes have been eaten by them,—the prohibition
contained in the text pertains to every such thing as has the slightest
possibility of being intended for being offered. And thus it is that the
prohibition becomes applicable (*a*) to what has been set aside as being
meant for an’ offering, (*b*) to the remnant of the substance that has
been offered, and (*c*) to such offering-material as has not been left
after having been eaten. It is in view of this that the text has used
the term ‘*kṛta*,’ which is the most general term denoting *action of
any kind*; and the compound ‘*haviṣ-kṛta*’ means ‘what has been *kṛta*,’
*i.e*., determined upon—as to be offered.’ And in this way, the
offering-material that is left after the sacrificer has eaten it, does
not cease to be included under the term ‘*haviṣ-kṛta*,’ since that also
is what ‘had been determined upon as to be offered.’ And thus the
prohibition becomes applicable to the substance in all conditions (after
it has been once fixed upon as to be offered).

By others the term ‘*haviṣ-kṛtam*’ has been explained as ‘mixed with the
offering-material;’ and since what is mixed up with something else is
prohibited, the unmixed offering-material also becomes forbidden. For
instance, when it is intended to forbid what is related to the Brāhmaṇa,
the texts use the word ‘Brāhmaṇa’ only.

“But how can the prohibition of the thing mixed with something else
imply the prohibition of that thing by itself?”

If the thing by itself were prohibited, then it might have been argued
that the prohibition of the mixed thing is secondary. In a case,
however, where, even on being mixed up, the two things are percieved as
distinct,—or, when, even though the colour of the two things is not
visible, yet by means of taste and such other means they are percieved
as distinct,—the two things are treated as if they were there by
themselves.

For instance, when fried flour and other things are mixed with wine,
even though the colour of the wine is not visible, yet, since the taste
of the wine is distinctly felt, the eating of such flour entails the
expiratory rite prescribed in connection with the drinking of wine.

*Objection*—“But even so, when the wine is mixed up with the flour, it
loses its liquid form; so that it cannot be a case of *drinking* of the
wine.”

There is no force in this objection. ‘Drinking’ has been mentioned,
because that is how wine is generally taken; and what is forbidden is
the ‘*taking*’ of wine; as the present context is dealing with what
shall be eaten and what shall be not eaten; and ‘eating’ here means only
‘*taking*,’ of which *drinking*, *eating, chewing* and the rest are only
special forms. As for *smelling*, since it is felt even when the
substance is not near at hand, it does not necessarily lead to the
presence of the substance itself. For instance, even when camphor and
such things are at a distance, their odour is felt. If it be assumed
that the odour is felt because of the fine particles of the substance
(having been wafted into the nostrils),—then such wafting away of the
particles should bring out a gradual diminution of the size of the
substance (which is not found to take place). In a case where two things
become mixed up and form one composite substance, and there is nothing
to indicate a reference to either one of them singly,—either a sanction
or a prohibition cannot apply to either of them by itself. *E.g*., when
it is said ‘milk should be drunk,’ it applies to the milk and the water
both mixed together, and not to the *water* alone, or the *milk* alone;
as each of these would be a distinct substance (from ‘milk’); each of
these by itself would have a distinct colour and a distinct taste
indicating its presence; and hence each would be a distinct substance.

“If this be so, then, when one drinks wine mixed with water, it should
not entail the expiatory rite that has been prescribed for the *drinking
of wine*; as the mixture would be a distinct substance from the mixture
drunk.”

There is no force in this objection. Wine, like the bitter taste,
entirely suppresses the taste of everything eke; so that, since in the
case cited, the taste of wine will have been clearly felt, the said
expiatory rite becomes necessary. When there is much water and only a
little wine, the expiatory rite to be performed is that which has been
prescribed for ‘contact with wine,’ as we shall explain in detail under
Discourse 11.

From all this it follows that where the prohibition is of a certain
thing by itself, it might involve that of its mixture also; *e.g*., when
it is said that “*māṣa* -grains shall not be eaten,’ such grains also
become eschewed as have *māṣa* mixed with them. But the prohibition that
pertains to a mixture—on what grounds could it be applied to the unmixed
thing by itself? *E.g*., when it is said—‘bring water from the
confluence of the Gaṅgā and the Yamunā,’—the man thus directed does not
bring water either from the Gaṅgā alone, or from the Yamunā alone. If
usage be cited as the ground for such application,—theu such usage has
got to be shown. \[Thus, if the term ‘*haviṣkṛtan*’ of the text were
taken as ‘*havirmiśram*,’ then the prohibition could not apply to the
*Haviṣ* itself.\]

‘*He shall not expound the law to him*.’—“The very first words of this
text have forbidden the offering to a *Śūdra* of any advice on temporal
or spiritual matters; and the expounding of law also becomes forbidden
by the same words.”

True; but the prohibition has been repeated for the purpose of
additional information; in the shape of special expiatory rites—laid
down in connection with the expounding of the law to a Śūdra,—which we
shall explain under 11.198.

Others have taken this additional prohibition to mean that ‘he shall
not, in the craracter (character?) of an officiating priest, instruct
the *Śūdra* regarding the details of procedure pertaining to the
*Pārvaṇa Śrāddha*, the *Pākayajña* and such other rites.’

Some people urge the following objection here:—“If the expounding of law
to the *Śūdra* is forbidden, from whence is the *Śūdra* to acquire his
knowledge of the law? In the absence of such knowledge, he can perform
no rites; so that the whole scripture dealing with the rites to be
performed by the *Śūdra* would be pointless.”

This is not a right objection. It is just possible that the Brāhmaṇa,
through avarice, may transgress the prohibition and teach the *Śūdra*.
For instance, when the Brāhmaṇa accepts a gift from a *Śūdra*, he is
urged to it. not by the Injunction relating to the ‘giving away of all
one’s belongings’ (which has been prescribed for the *Śūdra*) in
consequence of having killed a Brāhmaṇa; in fact, the motive is supplied
by his avarice.

“Well, we have the direct declaration that ‘the Brāhmaṇa shall explain
the law to others also.’”

But that refers only to the possible means of livelihood (open to the
*Śūdra*). What the text says is—‘The Brāhmaṇa should know the means of
livelihood open to all, and should explain it to others also’ (10.2).

Advice and teachings have to be certainly given to the *Śūdra* who is
dependent upon oneself; for an ignorant person is sure to transgress
injunctions and prohibitions; and association with such transgressers
has been forbidden under 79 above.

Some people explain the text as follows:—

“The present text contains two injunctions forbidding the teaching of
the text of the treatises dealing with Dharma or Law, and the expounding
of its meaning: one forbids the teaching of the verbal text and the
other that of its meaning. But the expounding of Law, without reference
to text, is not forbidden by any.”

But for those who explain the text thus, the present Verse will be a
mere repetition of the prohibition of consultation on matters relating
to the scriptures.

The following might be urged here—“The term ‘law’ applies to Grammar and
all those treatises that help in obtaining the knowledge of Law; but
Grammar is not a ‘scriptural treatise,’ in the sense of expounding
super-senseous (spiritual) things; hence the teaching of Grammar would
not be included under the prohibition here put forward; and yet Grammar
is of use in the understanding of Law; specially as the grammarian can,
by a close analysis of the words, find out the meaning of the most
difficult sentence. So that, since the prohibition relating to the
‘consultation’ (quoted above) pertains to the ‘Law-scriptures’ proper,
it would not apply to Grammar; hence it is the teaching of Grammar that
has been separately forbidden by the present text.”

All this would be quite right; only if no one urged that one who is not
entitled to the primary thing (the Veda), can never be thought of as
taking up its subsidiaries (the subsidiary sciences of Grammar, &c.) In
the present instance, the Veda and this Smṛti texts constitute the
‘primary;’ and to the study of these the *Śūdra* is not entitled.

‘*Nor shall he indicate to him any vrata or penance*.’—The term
‘*vrata*,’ ‘penance,’ here stands for the *kṛcchras*; such being the
sense in which the term has been used in 11.102 and other texts. These
be shall not indicate to the *Śūdra* who is seeking to acquire
prosperity by their means; in connection with expiatory rites, they have
got to be indicated. As for the ‘*vratas*,’ ‘observances,’ prescribed
for the ‘accomplished student,’ there is no possibility of these
pertaining to the *Śūdra*; for the simple reason that he can never be an
‘accomplished student.’ Similarly, the imparting of the *Sāvitrī* to him
is impossible, because he can never carry on Vedic Study; Vedic Study is
not possible for him, because he has not been *initiated*; and
Initiation is not possible for him, because it has been laid down for
the *three castes* only.—(80).


