+++
title = "082 न संहताभ्याम्"

+++
‘*Joined together*’—joined to one another. This forbids the scratching
of the head with both hands at the same time.

*Hands*; this forbids the use of the two arms joined together.

‘*His own*’— not that of others; hence there would be nothing wrong in
having one’s head scratched with the two hands of another person.

Since the *head* has been specified, there would be nothing wrong in
scratching the back and other parts of the body.

‘*He shall not touch it*’—his own head, with his own hand,—or with any
other part of the body, as some people have explained. But this is not
right, as it is the *hands* that are being spoken of in the text.

‘*He shall not bathe without it*’—*i.e*., without the head. This rule
applies to all kinds of bathing—the daily obligatory one as well as the
occasional one.

“Why should this rule be observed in the case of ordinary bathing, done
by a person who has perspired (and only wishes to clean the
perspiration)?”

That it should be so follows from the fact that the present rule is
meant to be taken along with the rule laying down *bathing*.

For connecting this rule with the *bathing* that is directly
enjoined,—there may be some reason. But, so far as the *ordinary*
bathing is concerned, since there is no injuction regarding it, there
can be no ground for observing the present rule in connection with it.”

Well, as a matter of fact, the root^(‘)to bathe’ denotes the act of
washing with water, cow’s urine and such things—*the whole body* or the
rest of the body, *barring the head*. And, since people might leave off
the head, when bathing on having touched a *Cāṇḍāla*, or some such
unclean thing,—the text forbids this by the rule—‘he shall not bathe
without the head.’ Ordinary bathing, without washing the head, is of
course possible; in view of which we have such assertions as—‘having
*bathed his head*, etc., etc.,’—(82)


