+++
title = "092 ब्राह्मे मुहूर्ते"

+++
The night being divided into three parts, the last part is the ‘*point
of time sacred to Brahman*;’ and it is at this time that one should
renounce sleep.

Fully awakened at the said time, he shall ‘*think over the means of
acquiring merit (i.e., Duty) and Wealth*’; he should also think over the
bodily trouble involved in the performance of his duties (as bringing
merit); and if he finds that a certain duty is an unimportant one, and
yet its fulfilment involves much bodily trouble,—or, if he finds that it
stands in the way of another Duty,—then he shall omit such a duty.
Similarly, the means of acquiring *Wealth* also—such as service and the
like—are the source of much trouble; and this also shall be omitted; in
view of the principle that ‘one should protect oneself from all things.’

What is meant is that he should not do anything without having duly
thought over it, and that he should not indulge in building castles in
the air. It is the very nature of men that, when they are not outwardly
engaged, there arise in their minds many fancies, in the form of a
longing for obtaining what belongs to others, and so forth. And it is
the avoiding of this that the text lays down, with a view to the man’s
temporal interests.

At the said time, ‘*the true meaning of the Veda*’ should also be
thought over, in its bearing upon causes and effects. That is, one
should meditate, in the manner laid down in the Vedānta, upon the
esoteric science of the Soul. Or, in connection with the ritualistic
section of the Veda also, he should ponder over the real meaning of the
texts; that is, in his own mind he should determine that ‘this is an
Injunction,’ ‘this its meaning;’ ‘this the action prescribed,’ ‘this is
the form of the act,’ ‘this is the Deity of this sacrifice,’ ‘this the
material to be employed,’ ‘such and such a person is entitled to its
performance,’ ‘such and such is the procedure to be adopted,’ and so
forth. He should also ponder over the diverse explanations provided by
the Commentators, and with the help of reason, he should decide whose
explanation is correct and whose wrong.—(92).


