+++
title = "106 प्रादुष्कृतेष्व् अग्निषु"

+++
The previous verse (103) has declared that when the three
phenomena—lightning, thunder and rain—appear together, it is to be
regarded as ‘time unfit for study,’ till the same hour next day. The
present verse declares that when only two of these appear together, it
is unfit for study till the fights are seen.

The compound ‘*stanitaniḥsvanaḥ*’ means the *roaring of thunder*; and
this, with the term ‘*vidyut*,’ forms the copulative compound
‘*vidyut-stanitaniḥsvanaḥ*.’ When these two appear at twilight, it is to
be regarded as time unfit for study ‘*till the lights are there*.’
During the day, the sun is the ‘*light*,’ a nd during the night fire is
the ‘*light*,’ So that, if the phenomena appear at morning twilight, it
is unfit for study only during the day, not at night; similarly if they
appear at evening twilight, it is unfit for study during the night; and
there is nothing wrong in reading in the morning.

From among the three phenomena (mentioned in 103)—lightning, thunder and
rain’—two have been mentioned here separately. So that ‘rain’ is the
‘*remaining*’ phenomenon; and when this third phenomenon appears, it is
unfit for study till the same time next day. It is in view of this that
it is said ‘*during the night as also during the day*.’

Another reading is ‘*śeṣam*,’ which means the *remaining portion*, of
the well-known sacrifices of *Jyotiṣṭoma* and the rest; the sense being
that ‘the day on which these sacrifices are performed, the whole of that
day is unfit for study.’

“Wherefore did not the Author say simply—‘*śeṣam tvākālikam smṛtam*’
(which would be much simpler)?”

Manu’s methods of composing his texts are most peculiar.—(106).


