+++
title = "124 ऋग्वेदो देव-दैवत्यो"

+++
It, has been declared that when Sāma-Veda is being chanted, the time is
unfit for the reciting of the Ṛgveda and the Yajurveda. Supplementary to
this, we have the present statement.

‘*Sacred to the pods*;’—*i.e*., that of which the gods are the presiding
genius; that is, which consists entirley of hymns to the gods. As a
matter of fact, hymns form the principal part of the Ṛgveda; it is for
this reason that it is called ‘*sacred to the gods*.’

As a matter of fact, action forms the predominating element in Men; and,
since the Yajurveda is made up principally of injunctions regarding
*Action*, the Yajurveda is, on account of this analogy, said to be
‘*human*.’ The term ‘*mānuṣa*’ denotes the genus ‘man;’ and, by a
process of identification, the Yajurveda has been called ‘*human*.’

‘*Related to the Pitṛs*’—may be taken to mean—either ‘beneficial to the
Pitṛs,’ or ‘of which the Pitṛs are the presiding genius;’ by some sort
of relationship, the Sāma-Veda has been called ‘related to the Pitṛs.’

There are three regions, and of these there, are three presiding beings;
the gods of Heaven, the Men of the Earth and the *Pitṛs* of the sky.
Similarly, there are three Vedas; and, since two of these have been
spoken of as related to ‘gods’ and ‘men,’ respectively, the third, Sāma
Veda, is, by a process of elimination, declared to be ‘*related to the
Pitṛs*.’

‘*Its sound is impure*’.—The sound of the Sāmaveda should not he
understood, by this, to be really impure; all that is meant is that,
just as Veda should not be recited in the presence of an impure
substance, so should it not he recited in the presence of the
Sāma-chant; it is on the ground of this similarity to ‘impure
substances’ that the sound of Sāma has been said to be ‘impure.’

From the context it is clear that this prohibition during Sāma-chant,
pertains to the reciting of the Ṛgveda and the Yajurveda in course of
the regular ‘Vedic study’ that, has been prescribed; and not to the
reciting of Mantra-texts that is done in the course of scrifical
performances.—(124)


