+++
title = "128 अमावास्याम् अष्टमीम्"

+++
‘*Shall remain a Religious Student*.’—Abstention from congugal
intercourse is among the duties of the Religious Student; and it is this
that is meant here; and not the other duties of begging food, and so
forth. Specially, as the phrase ‘even during the season’ brings to mind
that one duty first of all.

Others hold that, during the days mentioned, the eating of honey and
meat is also meant to be avoided. In support of this view, it is
necessary to quote another *Smṛti-* text: ‘The use of oil, meat, the
female generative organ and the razor is to be avoided on the sixth, on
the Moonless Day, on the fourteenth of both fortnights and on the Full
Moon Day.’

Others, again, have offered the following explanation:—“‘Religious
Student’ is the name given to a person in a particular Life-stage;
hence, when it is applied to the Householder and persons in other
life-stages, it becomes simply indicative of that peculiar
characteristic of the Religious Student which consists in the
performance of duties conducive to Vedic Study; this is the case with
the expression, ‘should remain a Religious Student.’ When the name of
one thing is applied to another, it denotes *similarity*; and, in
accordance with this principle, the expression would mean the adoption
of all the duties of the Religious Student,—such as begging for food,
tending of the Fire, and so forth. But the presence of such directions
as, ‘all this should be done *till the ceremony of Return*’ (2.108), and
‘the Householder shall eat the remnants,’ clearly preclude the said
duties of ‘begging for food’ and the like (which would be incompatiable
with the duty of ‘eating the remnants’) \[and the other duties are
clearly laid down as to be observed only *till the ceremony of Return*
\]. So that, the expression in question can only indicate the avoiding
of Honey, Meat and Sexual Intercourse (which is among the duties of the
Religious Student, and is compatible with the life of the Householder).”

But there is not much in all this; since the term, ‘Religious Student,’
is generally used in the sense of ‘avoiding sexual intercourse.’—(128)


