+++
title = "129 न स्नानम्"

+++
This prohibition does not apply to the daily bath; since there is no
possibility of its ever being done after the meals; specially, as in
another *Smṛti-text*, the order of sequence has been distinctly laid
down as—‘(1) Bath, (2) the Great Sacrifices and (3) the Eating of
Remnants.’ Nor can the prohibition apply to the bath necessitated by
touching of the Cāṇḍāla and such other circumstances; because such a
prohibition would be contrary to the general law that ‘one shall not
remain impure for a single moment.’ From all this it follows that the
prohibition applies to that purely voluntary bathing which one has
recourse to for the relieving of heat and perspiration, etc.

‘*Ill*’—suffering from some disease. For the sick person, all kinds of
bath have been forbidden, even when he may have become unclean;
specially in view of the direction that ‘one shall protect himself from
all things.’

*Question*—“How would such a man be purified?”

*Answer*— He shall sprinkle water over his body, or wipe off his body
with Mantras, or change his clothes, and so forth.

‘*Midnight*,’ ‘*Mahāniśā*;’—*i.e*., Four ‘*muhūrtas*,’ two on each side
of midnight.

Some people explain the term ‘*mahāniśā*’ as ‘*Long Night*,’ such as we
have during the winter.

But this explanation (by which bathing during winter-nights would be
forbidden) would be contrary to the Injunction that lays down early
morning bath during the (winter) months of *Māgha*, and *Phālguna*; and
as such, it must be regarded as a wrong explanation. Nor is there any
ground for restricting the prohibition to *winter nights* only;
specially as the text does not contain a second ‘*niśā*’ (which alone
could afford the sense, ‘during the night of those months when nights
are long.’)

‘*Along with his garments*.’—This implies that the prohibition applies
to the case where, during the cold weather, a man is wearing several
pieces of clothes; especially bathing with one piece of cloth on is what
has been already enjoined by such directions as ‘he shall not bathe
naked’ (4.45);—When he is wearing *two* pieces of cloth, there is
uncertainty, he may or may not bathe;—but when he has several pieces on,
he shall not bathe.

‘*Water-reservoir*’—containing water;—‘*unknown*’—*i.e*., with regard to
which it is not known whether it is deep or not deep, or whether there
are, or are not, allegators in it.

‘*Ajasram*’—ever, always.—(129)


