+++
title = "138 सत्यम् ब्रूयात्"

+++
In regard to what a man may be called upon to speak, he is restricted to
telling the truth. The ‘*true*’ is that which is in strict accordance
with what is seen and heard.

‘*He shall say what is agreeable*.’— This is a second injunction. It is
only right to describe the nobility and other good qualities of a
person, even without any purpose. Then again, it would be right to speak
to a person of the birth of his son—‘O Brāhmaṇa, a son has been born to
you’—if it were true; even though the speeker may not have any motive of
his own in conveying the information; if it is not known to him already.

What is ‘true’ may be ‘agreeable’ as well as ‘disagreeable.’ An example
of the ‘agreeable truth’ has been already shown, in the form of the
assertion, ‘O Brāhmaṇa, a son has been born to you.’ An example of the
‘disagreeable truth’ we have in the form of the assertion, ‘Your maiden
daughter is with child’. If this he *untrue*, it should not be spoken
of, of course; but even if it be true, the fact of a virgin being with
child is something that should not be spoken of. In such cases, if the
man can help it, he should remain silent.

People might be led to think that, even when the girl is pregnant, it
would be right to say, ‘she is not pregnant,’ as such an assertion would
he ‘agreeable;’—with a view to this, the Author has added—‘*He shall not
say what is agreeable, but untrue*;’ so that for the man who is the
first to notice the signs of pregnancy in the girl, it would not do to
remain silent.

‘*This is the eternal law*’— The Veda is eternal, hence the law laid
down in the Veda is also eternal.—(138)


