+++
title = "172 नाऽधर्मश् चरितो"

+++
The Author now proceeds to describe the sense of the scriptures.

What is said here is in view of the fact that the acts mentioned in the
Vedas as leading to good and evil results, are uncertain in regard to
the time of their fruition.

‘*Unrighteousness, practised*, *does not bring its fruit immediately*.’

All that is mentioned in the Veda is that the acts prescribed bring good
results, and those forbidden bring evil results; the exact time of
fruition is not mentioned. Even though the verbal operation of the Vedic
texts rests with indicating that a certain act *shall be done*, yet it
ends in indicating the relation between an act and the results accruing
therefrom; but it does not say anything regarding the time of the
fruition of the acts done, with a view to obtaining certain results; as
for the obligatory acts, that they *shall be done* follows from their
very nature;—lastly, in regard to the avoiding of the forbidden act
also, the persons entitled to this are not only those who are desirous
of avoiding the sufferings of hell, etc., but all those who are desirous
of abiding by the scriptures. And what the scriptural prohibition does
is to intimate that the doing of the forbidden act results in suffering.
A full discussion of this subject will prolong our work to an undue
length. Hence we stop here.

‘*Gauriva*’—‘like the Earth (or the Cow).’—The example cited here is
meant to be both (*a*) ‘similar’ and (*b*) ‘dissimilar.’ (*a*) The
Earth, on having the seed sown in it, does not immediately bring forth
the sheaves of corn; in fact, it requires gradual development; similar
is the case with the Vedic act; this is the similarity (between the
*act* and the *Earth*). (*b*) Through dissimilarity also—the animal,
*cow*, on being milked, brings its fruit (milk) immediately; *not so*
Virtue and Vice.

Though the text mentions ‘unrighteousness’ only, yet what is meant is to
show the uncertainty of time regarding the fruition of ‘*righteousness*’
also.

‘*Accumulating*’—gaining strength in time;—‘*of the actor*’—of the
perpetrator of the act—‘*cuts off*’— destroys—‘*the roots*.’

The *cutting off of the root* indicates total annihilation. Just as when
the roots are cut off, trees do not grow again; similarly, the practice
of unrighteousness also.—(172)


