+++
title = "176 परित्यजेद् अर्थ-कामौ"

+++
It has been said above that the ‘group of three’ constitutes the ‘ends
of man.’ Some people might think that all the three are equally
important, and argue as follows and act accordingly Righteous acts, like
the Jyotiṣṭoma, &c., are found to be performed at the cost of wealth and
pleasure. Such acts lead to loss of wealth by the giving away of the
sacrificial fee and other gifts; and they are opposed to pleasure,
inasmuch as it has been laid down that the person initiated for
sacrifices shall remain continent, and so forth. Exactly in the same
manner, it would be right to have recourse to the acquisition of wealth
and pleasure at the cost of righteousness, so that the prohibition, ‘One
shall not injure any living beings,’ forbids only such injury as one
might inflect upon others simply on account of enmity, and not that
which brings to the person wealth or pleasure.”

It is with a view to preclude such ideas that the text declares
that—‘*He shall avoid such wealth and pleasure*’ as involve opposition
to righteousness.

Having thus emphasized the superior importance of Righteousness, he
proceeds to add that, in some cases, righteous acts also have to be
avoided—‘*also righteousness if it be conducive to unhappiness*.’
‘Udarka’ means *sequence*; that whose sequence is unhappy is
‘*asukhodarka*.’ For instance, some people give away their entire
property, and obtain the fame of being an ‘extremely righteous and
charitable person;’—or, when, even on solitary river-banks, where many
ordinary persons see what is being done, people bathe, not so much for
acquiring spiritual merit, but for winning the praise of the
populace;—or, again, when large gifts are made to the ‘crows of sacred
places’ (the Brāhmaṇas, at these places, who hanker after gifts), for
the purpose of advertising their, powers of giving. All such acts are
deprecated.

Or, again (one should avoid), such acts as are ‘*disapproved by the
people*,’ as being blameworthy; *e.g*., the killing (at sacrifices) of
the bull, which should not be killed; and the act of eating its flesh is
more blameworthy than that of eating other kinds of flesh.

This prohibition is with a view to perceptible results, just like the
prohibition of touching a snake. Ordinary men, being ignorant, would not
know that the killing of the bull is permitted (under special
conditions), and would therefore make it known that the sacrificer of
the bull is an unrighteous person; and, as a large majority of men are
illiterate, even cultured persons, not caring to investigate the source
of the popular opinion, would avoid the person (as unrighteous). This is
what has been said in the passage—‘the king being righteous,’ etc.,
etc..

What we have said above, is in accordance with the explanation provided
by older writers. As a matter of fact, however, it can never be right to
reject, on the strength of *Smṛti*, what has been enjoined by the Veda.
The right example of the act aimed at by the Text is as follows: The
custom of ‘*niyoga*’ (‘begetting of a child on the widowed
sister-in-law’) is sanctioned by Smṛtis; but it is not performed,
because it is ‘deprecated by the people;’ or, again, when one is
supporting an unprotected young woman, entirely through pity,—if people
show their disapproval by giving out that ‘she appeals to hiś generosity
because she is a woman,’—then the said righteous act of supporting would
be one that is ‘deprecated by the people.’—(176)


