+++
title = "178 येनाऽस्य पितरो"

+++
The ‘rightious path’ that has been followed by his forefathers,—in the
way of forming friendships with certain persons, the forming of
marriage-alliances with certain people, the studying of a certain
rescensional text of the Veda, and so forth that same path should be
followed by the man himself. By acting thus, he ‘*shall not
suffer*’—*i.e*., he does not suffer harm, is not blamed in the world.

What is here laid down is the means of knowing one’s duty, that is open
to ignorant men,—especially in regard to such acts as not injuring
others, and so forth; just like the beat of the royal drum, which
announces to the Mlecchas and other people what they should do.- So far
as the *Agnihotra* and such acts are concerned, these are to be learnt
only by the texts bearing upon each of them.

Some people urge the following objection here:—“If what has been done by
the forefathers happen to be such as has no basis in the scriptures,—how
can that be regarded as ‘*dharma*,’ a ‘rightious act?’ If, on the other
hand, it has some basis in the scriptures, then that same would be the
source of knowledge open to the son also; and in that case, what would
be the point in referring him to the practice of his forefathers?”

This objection we have already answered by pointing out that what is
here laid down as the means of knowing duty that is open to illiterate
persons.

Others, again, make the following assertion:—“In a case where, even on
careful examination, one’s doubt regarding one’s duty does not
cease,—and the texts available are capable of lending support to both
the courses open to him,—in such cases, one should act according to the
practice of one’s forefathers.”

This view also needs to be examined. There is no *valid* source of
knowledge that can be always doubtful; the text bearing upon a question
must always point to only one efficient course of action.

It may be that what is meant is that, in the matter of optional
alternatives, one should adopt the practice of one’s forefathers; simply
because it has been adopted by others in the past.

‘*The path of the righteous*.’—This has been added with a view to
emphasize the fact that, if one’s forefathers may have followed an
unrighteous path, one shall not follow such a practice, in such
cases.—(178).


