+++
title = "192 न वार्य्"

+++
The duties of the Receiver having been described, the Text proceeds to
describe those of the Giver.

The term, ‘*even*,’ precludes the giving of all things; when even water
is prohibited, how can anything else be given to the man? This is a
hyperbolical way of forbidding the gift of other things. As for water
itself, there can be no prohibition regarding it, as it is of use to all
beings.

“It has been already said that one shall not honour, even with speech,
those who behave like cats (4.32).”

True; what is forbidden there, is the act: of honouring them; what is
forbidden here, is the offering of gifts to them; and these, the gifts
of wealth, not of anything else. Thus, both prohibitions become useful,
as is going to be asserted later on (193)—‘Property, though earned
according to law, etc.’ It is for this reason that the giving of *food*,
in a disrespectful manner, to heretics and others is not forbidden.

In this connection, some people argue as follows:—“Though the text has
mentioned the person ‘*ignorant of the Veda*,’ this should be taken to
include also the person *who is not studying the Veda*. Because all
interested gifts have been laid down as to be offered to only such
persons as are studying the Veda; and it is not right to put them on the
same footing as heretics.”

These persons should be asked the following question:—Where has it been
laid down that gifts are to be offered to only such persons as are
studying the Veda, and are still without full knowledge of it *?*

It might be said that this has been laid down in 3.128, where it is said
that—these things are to be given only to the *Śrotriya* (Vedic
student).

But, since the same passage contains the qualification ‘worthy’—and this
is not possible without *complete learning*,—the passage cannot refer to
the mere student still pursuing his studies. Specially, as we have such
other passages as—‘the fee shall be paid to a learned person’—which
occur in the same context as the passage quoted. Hence, by taking the
two passages together, it follows that gifts are to be offered to
persons possessed of both the qualifications. Thus we do not find any
ground for renouncing the direct meaning of the text.

As for the impropriety of the Vedic Student being put on the same
footing as heretics,—there can be no impropriety in what is directly
asserted by the text.

‘*Vaiḍālavratika*’ is one who behaves in the manner of a cat; and,
similarly, ‘*vakavratika*’ is one who has the maimers of a heron.

The Locative endings have been used because it is the idea of
*receptacle* that is meant to be conveyed. If the *recipient* were meant
to be expressed, the Dative would have been the right form to
use.—(192).


