+++
title = "195 धर्मध्वजी सदा"

+++
The two terms (‘*viḍalavratika*’ and ‘*vakavratika*’) are used
figuratively, and the grounds of such figurative use being multifarious,
that one is to be accepted, on the basis whereof the term may have been
used in a certain case. And it is necessary to Ascertain this exactly,
for the purpose of finding out definitely the exact import of the
prohibition.

He for whom his virtue is *like a flag*. The compound is in accordance
with Pāṇini 2. 1.56. It may also be taken as a *Karmadhāraya* compound,
the meaning being ‘the virtuous flag.’ The term, ‘*dharmadhvajī*’ thus
means, ‘he who has flag-like virtue,’ the word ending with the
possessive affix ‘*ṇini*.’ This name is applied to the man who performs
righteous acts only for the purpose of fame, and not because they are
prescribed in the scriptures, *i.e*., the person who perforins righteous
acts only in such places where people see them, and who advertises his
righteousness by his own agents, for the purpose of making himself known
as righteous, and hence succeeding in receiving gifts, etc.

‘*Covetous*,’— jealous and also miserly.

‘*Hypocrite*,’— the man who commits fraud on the people.

‘*Cheat*,’— he who behaves deceitfully. ‘Cheating’ is deceit. The person
who is ostentatiously righteous, while in secret he steals what is
guarded and makes known what should be kept secret, people think him to
be a avirtuous man and, believing that a secret entrusted to him cannot
leak out, convey to him some secret of theirs; and in the end, this
secret becomes divulged to just that person from whom it was intended to
be kept. This is a form of injuring others.

‘*The traducer of all persons*,’—he who cannot bear the good qualities
of others, and hence calumniates them. ‘*Abhisandhaka*’ is formed
according to Pāṇini 3. 1. 136, and then the reflexive ‘*ka*’ and
‘*sarvābhisandhaka*’ is a Genitive Tatpuruaṣa compound.

Such a person is to be known as ‘*one who behaves like a cat*’ a
‘*viḍalavratika*.’

At this place, some people read the following verse (in the text):—

*When a man’s flag of virtue is ever raised*, *like Indra’s flag, and
his sins are hidden,—this is the behaviour called “cat-like*;”
(195A)—and this states, in brief, what has been stated in the foregoing
text (195).

The presence of even one of the qualities mentioned, marks out the man
as one of cat-like behaviour; and that this is so is inferred from the
verse just quoted. The clause, ‘whose sins are hidden,’ does not
specifically mention any particular sin, and all the sins mentioned (in
195) are equally ‘sins;’ and thus, by means of these two verses, the
same fact has been brought home to the pupils by the Teacher. Some of
the pupils were taught the former verse (195) and some the present one
(195A); both are equally authoritative. Thus then, when it is asserted
that ‘Devadatta is one who is wearing the armlet and the ear-ring, with
fat shoulders and full chest,’—where all the qualifications are
recognised as collectively distinguishing Devadatta,—yet, in the case in
question, each of the qualifications serves singly to distinguish the
man of ‘cat-like behaviour.’—(195).


