+++
title = "196 अधो-दृष्टिर् नैष्कृतिकः"

+++
‘Looking downwards’ is a mark of ‘heron-like behaviour.’ Or, the term,
‘*adhodṛṣṭih*’ may mean ‘whose ideas are ‘*nīca*,’ *i.e., mean*; he who
is ever ready to do anything, who accepts gifts even from the lowest
persons.

‘*Niṣkṛti*’ is cruelty; he, in whom this is the principal factor, is
called ‘*niṣkṛtika*,’ ‘cruel,’ he who talks in an improper manner.

‘*Falsely humble*,’—who shows himself to be extremely gentle and
harmless, but, in actual practice, turns out to be most harmful. For
example, the cat pretends to be asleep, when intent upon catching its
prey; similarly, the person whose righteousness is mingled with deceit,
has been called ‘*a man of cat-like behaviour*.’ So also with the
expression, ‘*of heron-like behaviour*:’ When seeking to catch fish,
herons pretend to show as if they were taking no notice of the creatures
in water, and yet all the time they are intent upon catching the fish.

The term ‘*vrata*’ denotes *habit*.

It has been shown above how there is no repetition in the several parts
of the verses. Even if there were some real repetitions, there would be
nothing wrong in this, as the verses contain definitions (of two
distinct characters); and the repeated assertions make the fact more
easily intelligible.

“What is the difference between the *cat-like* and the *heron-like*
behaviour!”

We explain as follows:—The latter (one who is *heron-like*) is bent upon
accomplishing his own ends, he does not thwart the purposes of other
men; while the former (one who is *cat-like*), thwarts the purpose of
other people, through sheer jealousy, even though his own interests be
not served by it—(196).


