+++
title = "204 यमान् सेवेत"

+++
‘*Yamas*,’ ‘Restraints,’ are negative, of the nature of prohibitions;
*e.g*., ‘the Brāhmaṇa should not be killed,’ ‘wine should not be drunk,’
and so forth. The ‘*niyamas*,’ ‘*observances*,’ are positive in form, of
the nature of something *to be done*; *e.g*., ‘one shall daily recite
the Veda,’ and so forth.

‘*Not necessarily the Observances*.’—This does not mean that one shall
not keep the Observances; all that is meant is that the Restraints are
more obligatory in their character than the Observances.

This is what is further emphasized:—‘*Not observing the Restraints, one
falls*.’ If the Restraints are not observed, it means that
Brāhmaṇa-killing and such acts are done, which means that the man has
become an outcast, and people do not find it advisable to sit near him
or have any dealings with him. It is not so in the case of the
non-keeping of the Observances. To this effect we have the following
assertions current among cultured people:—

‘The man who keeps the Observances, but is not intent upon the
Restraints, falls; but he who observes the Restraints, but not the
Observances, does not suffer. Therefore, one should devote one’s
attentions to the Restraints, not minding the Observances so much.’

For some people, the terms ‘*Yama*’ and ‘*Niyama*’ have technical
significations,—*e.g*., (*a*) ‘not injuring others, truthfulness,
continence, sinlessness, non-thieving,—these five constitute the
*Yamas*, the major observances; (*b*) Absence of Anger, Attendance on
the Teacher, Purity, Light Food, Carefulness,—these constitute the five
*Niyamas*, the minor Observances.’

Even according to this view, the present verse indicates the relative
importance of the two sets of duties.

Thus, what the present verse lays down is neither that one shall observe
the *Yamas*, nor that one shall *not* keep the Observances; since both
are equally prescribed by the scriptures.—(204)


