+++
title = "208 भ्रूणघ्नावेक्षितञ् चैव"

+++
‘*Bhrūnahā*’ is the *Brāhmaṇa-slayer*; what has been ‘*looked
at*’—eagerly seen—by such a person. This is only illustrative; it
indicates other sinful persons also. The prohibition of food *touched*
by these persons follows from the rule that lays down the necessity of
bathing on being touched by such sinners.

‘*Udakyā*’ is the woman in her courses; and what is forbidden is food
*touched*—not merely *seen*—by her.

“As a matter of fact, the Text is going to lay down the necessity of
bathing on touching a woman in her courses; this alone being sufficient
to indicate her impurity, how could there be any possibility of any one
taking the food touched by her (that the Author should have found it
necessary to forbid it)?”

Our answer to this is as follows:—\[ This prohibition was thought
necessary, because \] in the first place, people might be led to eat
food touched by her after having washed it; or secondly, in view of what
has been said regarding the mention of the ‘*Brāhmaṇa-slayer*’ being
illustrative, some one might be led to believe that this latter term is
indicative of all those that are mentioned in verse 5.85; and, in that
case, the prohibition would apply to the food even *seen* by the woman
in her courses.

This same explanation applies to the prohibition of ‘*what has been
touched by a dog*.’

It has been said that the term ‘*Brāhmaṇa-slayer*’ is indicative of
other sinful outcasts also; and what are thus included are the
‘outcast,’ ‘the newly-delivered woman’ and others mentioned later on (in
5.85); and the ‘woman in her courses.’ also includes the newly-delivered
woman.

‘*Patatri*’ is bird; and the birds meant are the carnivorous ones, the
vulture, *etc*., and not the swan and other non-carnivorous ones; such
being the usage among men.—(208)


