+++
title = "211 अभिशस्तस्य षण्ढस्य"

+++
‘*Unchaste woman*’—one who has sexual intercourse with any and every
person.

“The food of the harlot has been already forbidden \[so that the present
text would appear to be superfluous\].”

It is not so; the ‘unchaste woman’ is totally different from the
‘harlot.’ The ‘harlot’ is one that makes a living by her beauty; while
the ‘unchaste woman’ is one who is unstable in her sexual passions.

‘*Hypocrite*’—the ‘man of cat-like behaviour’ and others of similar bad
conduct.

‘*The Śūdra’s leavings*’ are specially forbidden here for the purpose of
indicating the heaviness of the expiatory panance necessitated by
it;—the partaking of the leavings of all men having been already
forbidden.

Others explain the terms, ‘*Śūdra’s leavings*,’ to mean the food *left
in the dish*, after the *Śūdra* has eaten out of it.

Another reading is ‘*ucchiṣṭamagurostathā*,’ ‘the leavings of persons
other than one’s teacher.’

As a matter of fact, the term ‘*ucchiṣṭa*’ stands for that which has
been defiled by the touch of another person, as also for that which has
been left after another person has eaten. In the latter sense, if one’s
own ‘leavings’ were prohibited, then every one would have to cat the
whole of one’s food as a single morsel. Nor is it the custom among
cultured people that, after having eaten one morsel of food, the man
washes his hands and mouth and eats the next morsel out of another dish.
As for the prohibition that ‘one Should not cat the food once partaken
of,’ what this forbids is the interruption of the meal by such acts as
rising to receive a guest, and so forth, till one has had one’s fill and
till one has washed; after which the touch of others involves no harm.

Where several persons are dining together, even if they happen to touch
one another,—as this touching is something totally different,—it would
not be a case of ‘eating the leavings.’ As a matter of fact, the Father,
along with his sons, always partakes of the food *left* by guests.
Āpastamba and others have deprecated eating *with uninitiated sons*,—not
with the *initiated* ones.

According to this view, the prohibition would apply to eating in the
company of men of other castes; and, in all such cases, some intervening
screen shall he set up between the two persons. As for ‘leavings,’ in
the sense of what has been left after one has eaten,—this is forbidden,
whether it be one’s own ‘leavings’ or those of some other person,—(211).


