+++
title = "212 चिकित्सकस्य मृगयोः"

+++
‘*Hunter*,’—the professional hunter of animals; one who kills animals
for purposes of hunting, or for the purpose of selling their flesh.

‘*Cruel*,’—whose nature is not straightforward, who is difficult to
please.

‘*One who lives on leavings*,’—*i.e*., one who eats such leavings as
have been forbidden.

‘*Ugra*’—is the name of a special sub-caste. In the Veda, the term is
applied to a kind of king, one who forms the central link in the chain
of the king’s alliance. There is no other prohibition regarding such a
king; it is only in course of showing the evils arising from eating the
food of such kings that we rend—‘the food given by kings deprives one of
one’s energy,’ from which some sort of prohibition may be inferred.
\[For all these reasons, the term ‘*Ugra*’ in the text must be taken to
stand for a particular mixed caste, and not for the *king* \].

‘*Sūtikānnam*’ is food prepared for the woman in childbed; and this
should not be eaten even by men of her own family.

This food is to be avoided ‘*until, ten days have passed*.’ Though, in
the case of the Kṣatriya and other castes, the period of impurity lasts
longer than ten days, yet the food is to be avoided for ten days only.

Another reading is ‘*sūtakānnam*;’ and the term ‘*sūtaka*,’ ‘impurity,’
due to child-birth, in this case, would indicate the *persons* under
that impurity; the meaning being that ‘one should not eat for ten days
the food offered by persons, in whose family there is impurity due to
child-birth.’ This prohibition applies to those cases in which, for all
persons, the period of impurity due to child-birth extends over ten
days. But if the view be taken that impurity due to childbirth applies
to the parents only, or to the mother only,—then food is to be avoided
as long as the period of impurity may last in each particular case;—the
term ‘*until ten days have passed*’ being indicative of the ‘period of
impurity.’ Thus *Kṣattñyas* and others would have their food avoided
during such time as the period of impurity may last in each individual
case.

‘*Sūtikānnamanirdaśam*’ being the right form of the expression, the term
‘*paryācāntam*,’ ‘*that which has been interrupted by washing*,’ has
been made to intervene (between the words, ‘*sūtikānnam*’ and
‘*anirdaśam*’) by considerations of metrical exegencies.

Others have taken ‘*anirdaśam*’ separately, by itself (and not as
qualifying ‘*sūtakānnam*’). Under this, the term ‘*sūtaka*’ would
indicate the period of impurity, and ‘*anirdaśam*’ would stand for the
milk of the cow and other animals (within ten days of their calving).

‘*Interrupted by washing*’— in course of which rinsing and washing have
been done. If, for some reason, the person washes his hand, then he
should not eat of the food left in the dish.—(212)


