+++
title = "222 भुक्त्वातो ऽन्यतमस्याऽन्नम्"

+++
‘*Three days fast*;’—*i.e*., he shall not eat anything for three days.

‘*Unknowingly*,’—not intentionally.

In the case of its being done *intentionnlly*, one should perform the
‘*Kṛcchra*’ penance. And this *^(‘)Kṛcchra*’ should be the
‘*Tapta-kṛcchra*,’ in view of what other Smṛti texts have laid down. One
such text (Gautama 23.2) has prescribed the ‘*Tapta-kṛcchra*’ as to be
performed in the case of eating semen; ordure and urine;—*viz*., ‘In the
event of drinking these intentionally, one shall live upon milk, butter,
water and air—upon each of these for three days; this is the
*Taptātikṛcchra*; and then follows his purification,’

The present being not a section dealing with Expiatory Rites, the
mention of such a rite is meant to indicate the seriousness of the
offence.

In view of the phrase, ‘*of any one of these*,’ being in the Genitive
form, some people have held that the Expiatory Rite here prescribed is
meant to apply to only those cases where the food actually belongs to
the persons mentioned, and *not* where it is objectionable by reason of
time, or by its very nature, or by contact. Among such articles of food
as sour-gruel and the like, non-eatability is of four kinds:—(1) some
things are non-eatable, because of time ; *e.g*., sour-gruel, things
kept overnight, and so forth; (2) some are non-eatable, because of
contact; *e.g*, things that have come in contact with wine and such
things; (3) some are non-eatble by their very nature; *e.g*., garlic and
such things; (4) some are non-eatable by reason of their owner; *e.g*.,
the food of the persons enumerated in the present context.

Our answer to the above is as follows:—It is quite true that there are
four kinds of *non-eatability*; it is true also that the text has used
the Genitive form; but if the Expiatory Rite here prescribed did not
pertain to such food as *sour gruel* and the like, but only to what is
objectionable in regard to its owner, then the mention of these in the
present connection would be entirely meaningless. For the prohibition of
these two things is coining under Discourse V. From this it is clear
that their mention in the present context is only for the purpose of
prescribing the Expiatory Rite.

“Why, then, should they he mentioned in Discourse V.?”

This we shall explain at that place. As for the exact meaning and
purpose of such texts as—(*a*) ‘the eating of the first two is
objectionable’ and (*b*) ‘having eaten the food of persons whose food
should not he eaten,’ *etc*. (11.152),—we shall explain all this in
detail under those same texts—(222).


