+++
title = "231 वासोदश् चन्द्रसालोक्यम्"

+++
He comes to look like—just as pleasing to look at as—the Moon. According
to the Purāṇas, the meaning would be that he reaches that particular
region in Heaven which is called the ‘Region of the Moon.’

‘*Resemblance to horse-owners*;’—*i.e*., he obtains many horses.
According to the Purāṇa,—‘he obtains the region of the Ashwins.’

‘*Ox*’ is the male animal, capable of pulling carts; he who gives this,
obtains ‘*great good fortune*’;—*i.e*., acquires excellent cattle,
sheep, riches and grain.

‘*Bradhna*’ is the *Sun*; he obtains the region of the Sun; *i.e*., he
becomes endowed with great effulgence, superior to everything else. Or,
the ‘*region* *of* *the Sun*’ may stand for Heaven.

Another Smṛti-text (Yājñavalkya, Achara, 204) describes special results
arising from the giving of particular kinds of cows:—‘A milch cow, with
golden horns and silvered hoofs, quiet and covered with cloth, shall be
given, along with a *kāṃsya* vessel, accompanied with a proper fee.’ If
we read ‘*sa-dakṣiṇā*,’ the meaning will be that gold and other things
shall be given as additional gifts. Or, we may read ‘*su*’ for ‘*sa*’
(*i*. *e., ‘sudaksiṇā*),’ meaning *beautiful*; the meaning being that
the cow given, as also the presents, shall be
*excellent*.—‘*kāṃsyopadohā* is another reading for ‘*sakāṃsyapatra*;’
‘*kāṃsya*’ standing for a particular measure; and the cow should give
that much milk; *i.e*., she should give a large quantity of milk.

Further details of procedure have been laid down in other texts; such
as—‘Her tail shall be adorned with pearls, the ground shall be covered
with silver,’ and so forth; and these have to be observed by men
desiring special results; as described in the text—‘The tawny cow with
calf saves

one’s forefathers up to the seventh degree, and the double-faced cow
(one just giving birth to a calf) for the same number of cycles as there
are hairs on her body. The result here mentioned follows from the giving
of the tawny cow; the double-faced cow, when given, leads to Heaven, for
as many ‘thousand years’ as there are hairs on her body;—‘saves’ stands
for *freeing from sin*.

In the Mahābhārata, the giving of the cow has been describes as bringing
all kinds of rewards.

The giving of water, etc., also is found mentioned as bringing all kinds
of rewards—‘Having given land, cattle, food, clothes, water, sesamum,
butter, shelter, houses and gold—one shines in Heaven.’ ‘*Naiveśika*’
means *House*.—(231)


