+++
title = "234 येन येन"

+++
The tern ‘*bhāva*,’ ‘*spirit*,’ denotes *mental disposition*. In
whatever spirit—with a pleasant mind, proper faith and respect—one
bestows a gift, in that same spirit he himself obtains it; if, on the
other hand, he gives without faith, in a disrespectful manner and after
having insulted the recipient,—then he himself also obtains it in the
same manner.

The phrase, ‘*yadyat*,’ ‘*whatever*,’ does not refer to the *kinds of
things* (given as gifts).—“What, then, is the use of the
expression?”—The explanation is that the phrase means that ‘the man
obtains the pleasures brought about by the substances concerned.’ If the
objects themselves were meant, then, in the case of a man giving
medicines to a sick person, he would obtain (as reward) that same
medicine; and, since such a reward would be of no use to a healthy
person, it would be thrown away. For this reason, the meaning must be
that ‘the giver obtains the same kind of pleasure that he causes by his
gift;’ so that the gift of medicines would bring sound health to the
giver.

Or, the term ‘*bhāva*’, ‘*spirit*,’ may stand for *desire, purpose*, the
idea ‘may this be mine;’ the sense of the passage in that case would
be—‘the man obtains that same reward, with a view to obtaining which he
bestows the gift,’—and that ‘*in the same spirit*;’ *i.e*., he obtains
it at the same time at winch he happens to be in want of it. This
implies that the gift of all things may bring to the giver all kinds of
rewards.—(234)


