+++
title = "247 एध+उदकम् मूल-फलम्"

+++
‘*Fuel*’—the wood, etc, to burn.

‘*Food*’—either cooked or raw.

‘*Offered*’—presented before him.

All this may be accepted from all persons;—*i.e*., even from *Śūdras*,
or persons who may have committed minor sins; only avoiding the outcast,
the accused, the Cāṇḍāla and other low castes mixed in the reverse
order.’

‘*Madhu*’—Honey.

‘*Gift* *of fearlessness*.’—Fearlessness is the form of a gift. This is
mentioned by way of illustration. In fact, the ‘acceptance of a gift’
consists in accepting something which another person voluntarily offers;
and the ‘possession of fearlessness’ is not of this kind; as, in this
case, no one’s ownership ceases, nor is any one’s ownership produced (as
there is in all cases of giving and gifts). It is for this reason that
the term, ‘gift,’ has been used in this connection, only by way of
eulogising the said promise. The meaning is that—‘just as, when one is
passing through a forest or jungle, there is no harm in acceptiong
(accepting?) the protection offered even by Cāṇḍālas, robbers, and such
other persons, so also there is nothing objectionable in the accepting
of fuel and the other things mentioned here.’

The rule here laid down applies to normal times; it is going to be
declared later on that in abnormal times of distress, one may accept
gifts even from Caṇḍālas and others.

The term, ‘*offered*,’ is, through proximity, to be construed with
‘*food*’ only, not with ‘*fuel*’ and the rest. Hence, in connection with
these latter, even begging is not objectionable.

The general rule being—‘gifts should be accepted only from righteous
twice-born persons,’ no one would think of accepting them from either
unrighteous twice-born persons, or from *Śūdras*. Hut, in the case of
certain things (fuel, etc.), begging is considered desirable. Hence the
present text—(247)


