+++
title = "002 भगवन् सर्ववर्णानाम्"

+++
The second verse describes what the sages said to Manu, after having
approached and worshipped him.

The term ‘*bhaga*,’ ‘blessings,’ is used for *superiority, magnanimity,
fame, strength* and so forth; and ‘*bhagavān*’ is he who possesses all
this; that is (in the present context) *Manu*; hence it is he who is
addressed by the term ‘O blessed one.’

The term ‘*caste*’ is applied to the three castes, ‘*Brāhmaṇa*,’
‘*Kṣatriya*,’ and ‘*Vaiśya*’—the term ‘all’ has been added for the
purpose of including the ‘*Śūdra*’; if this was not done, then, the
question, emanating from the Great Sages (who represent only the three
higher castes), would be restricted to the three castes only.

‘*Intermediate*’ means *middle*; from the mixture of two castes there
arises another imperfect caste; those that are born out of those
imperfect unions are the ‘intermediate castes,’ born in the natural
order or the reverse; those known under the names ‘*Mūrdhāvasikta*,’
‘*Kṣattṛ*,’ ‘*Vaidehika*’ and so forth (*Vide*, Manu 10.7 *et. seq*.),
these could not be classed under the caste either of the mother or that
of the father; just as the Mule born out of the union of the Horse and
the Ass is a distinct species, it is neither the ‘horse’ nor the
‘ass’;—on this ground these would not be included under the ‘castes’;
hence they have been mentioned separately.

*Objection*—“But the offspring of ṭhe union of castes mixed in the
natural order is regarded as belonging to the caste of the mother.”

It is not so, we reply. From what is said under 10.6 as to these castes
being ‘similar,’ it is clear that they are only ‘similar’ to the caste
of the mother, and not quite the same as this latter. The functions of
these intermediate castes also are such as can be learnt only from
scriptures; they cannot be ascertained entirely from their natural
inclinations (as in the case of lower animals); and in as much as these
functions cannot be ascertained by the help of any other source of
knowledge, they fall under the term ‘Dharma,’ ‘duties,’ and as such
deserve to be expounded in the scriptures. Of the intermediate castes
born of unions in the reverse order, such duties as ‘not harming others’
and so forth are going to be described (by Manu himself under 10.63).
When they are spoken of as being ‘without any duties,’ the ‘duties’
meant are such as Observances, Fasts and so forth.

‘*Yathāvat*,’ ‘*in due form*.’—The suffix ‘*vati*’ denotes *propriety*;
the meaning being—‘in the form in which performance would be proper.’
This ‘propriety’ also includes such details as—‘this is compulsory, that
is optional,’ ‘this is primary, that is secondary,’ as also rules
relating to substance, place, time, agent and so forth.

‘*Anupūrvaśaḥ*,’ ‘*in due order*.’—‘Order’ means *sequence*; the meaning
is—‘please explain also the order in which the several duties have to be
performed.’ The order meant is such as—after the performance of the
‘Birth-rite,’ come respectively ‘Tonsure,’ ‘Initiation’ and so forth.
The phrase ‘in due form’ implies completeness in regard to
subject-matter; ‘order’ does not form part of the subject-matter, hence
the qualification ‘in due order’ has been added separately.

The word ‘*dharma*,’ ‘*duty*,’ is found to be used in reference to—(1)
the injunction of what should be done, (2) the prohibition of what
should not be done,—both these bearing upon transcendental purposes,—and
also (3) action in accordance with the said Injunctions and
Prohibitions. Whether the denotation of the term applies equally to
both, or it applies primarily to one only, and to another only
secondarily,—this we do not discuss on the present occasion; and we have
already discussed this in detail in another work (the *Smṛtiviveka*),
and it has no direct bearing on the present context. In any case, when
it is declared that the *Aṣṭakās* should be performed,’ what is clearly
understood is the *propriety of performing* in relation to the
*Aṣṭakāt*; and when it is declared that ‘the meat of the animal killed
by a poisoned arrow should not be eaten,' what is dearly understood is
the *impropriety of performing* in relation to the eating of the said
meat. Whether the *action of the Aṣṭakā* is regarded as ‘*duty*,’ or the
*propriety of performing that act*,—it does not make any difference in
the ultimate result. And when the form of ‘duty’ has been duly
expounded, that is contrary constitutes ‘*Adharma*’ (sin) follows
naturally by implication. Thus what is meant is that ‘*Dharma*,’ ‘Duty,’
as also ‘*Adharma*,’ ‘sin,’ both form the subject-matter of the
scriptural treatise: the *performance* of the ‘Aṣṭakā’ is a *Duty*, as
also is the *avoidance* of Brāhmaṇa-murder’; the *non-performance* of
Aṣṭaka’ is a *sin*, as also is the *performance* of Brāhmaṇa-murder’;
such is the distinction (between ‘Duty’ and ‘Sin’ as described in the
scriptures).

‘*Arhasi*,’ ‘*may you*’—indicates *ability* in the shape of possessing
the requisite capacity; and as such expresses the fact of the teacher
being a lit and proper person for the expounding the duties; the sense
being—‘in as much as you are fully able to expound the Duties, hence you
are a fit and proper person for that work,—ns such you are entreated by
us to explain to us the said Duties’; it follows by implication that
when a man is a fit and proper person for doing a certain act, that act
should be done by him. The term of entreaty ‘do please explain to us’ is
supplied from without.—(2)


