+++
title = "003 त्वम् एको"

+++
At this stage the following question arises—“It has been said that the
term ‘Duty’ is used in the sense of only that activity which tends to
accomplish a transcendental purpose; and such activity may consist in
the *performing of the Aṣṭakā*, as also in *bowing to Caityas* and such
other acts (prescribed in the heterodox scriptures); and what sort of
Duties is going to be expounded in the present Treatise?”

In answer to this we have the third verse, which serves the purpose of
pointing out what Duties are going to be expounded and also of further
indicating the aptitude of Manu already mentioned.

‘*Thou alone*’—without any one to help you; without a second.

‘*Sarvasya vidhānasya kāryatattvārthavit*.’—The term ‘*Vidhāna*,’
meaning that by which acts are enjoined, stands for the *scripture*;—it
is called ‘*svayambhu*’ in the sense that it is eternal, not a product,
not the work of man; and its name is ‘*Veda*’;—‘*entire*’ *i.e*.,
including the text which is directly found in the Veda, as also that the
exact words of which are only inferred; for instance, (*a*) in the
text—‘*one should perform the Agnihotra, it pertains to thousand
men*,—by means of this verse one should worship the Āhavanīya’—we have
the Veda directly enjoining what is to be done; the term ‘by means of
this,’ ending as it docs with the instrumental case-termination, serving
to point out the employment of the mantra-text directly quoted;—(*b*)
while in the case of the injunction ‘the Aṣṭakās should be performed,’
which is found in the *Smṛti, we* infer, on the strength of this
*Smṛti*, the corresponding Veda text;—similarly, when we read the
Mantra-text, ‘I am chopping grass, the seat of the Gods,’ we at once
infer, on the basis of the indicative power of the words of that text,
the Vedic injunction that ‘the said text is to be employed in the
chopping of grass this Mantra is found in that section of the Veda which
deals with the *Darśa-pūrṇamāsa sacrifice*, and the *chopping of grass*
is laid down as to be done in course of that sacrifice; but there is no
such direct injunction as that ‘the chopping should be done with such
and such a Mantra and the above-mentioned Mantra-text is found to be
capable, by its very form, of indicating the *chopping of grass*; while
as regards its being connected in a general way, with the sacrifice,
this follows the fact of its occurring in the same ‘context’ as the
injunction of that sacrifice; and it is by virtue of its own indicative
force that it comes to be employed in the chopping of grass. The idea
arising in the mind of the student (on noticing the above facts) is as
follows:—‘From the context it follows that the Mantra-text in question
should be used in the performance of the *pūrṇamāsa* sacrifices;—how is
this to be done?—well, the natural answer is that it is to be used in
the manner in which it is capable of being used; the capacity of a
thing, even though not directly mentioned, always help., in determining
its use;—what then is the Mantra-text capable of doing?—it is capable of
indicating the *chopping of grass*;—hence from the context, and from the
capability of the Mantra itself, it follows that it should be employed
in the chopping of grass’;—as soon as this idea has been arrived at, the
corresponding words, ‘by this Mantra the chopping of grass should be
done,’ present themselves to the mind; because as a matter of fact,
every concrete conception is preceded by the corresponding verbal
expression. The said verbal expression, thus presenting itself to the
mind, is called the ‘*inferred* Vedic text.’ The Text thus inferred is
regarded as ‘Veda,’ by virtue of the fact that it owes its existence to
the force of two other Vedic texts—*viz*., the text laying down the
*Darśapūrṇamāsa* and the *Mantra-text* referred to above. Such is the
opinion of Kumārila.

Or, the term ‘*vidhāna*’ may be taken as equivalent to ‘*vidki*’,
meaning actual *operation*, the *accomplishment of purpose*; this is
called ‘*svayambhu*’ in the sense that it is *eternal, i.e*., handed
down by beginningless tradition,—or that *it is prescribed in the
eternal Veda*;—‘entire’—*i.e*., what is prescribed in the directly
available verbal texts, and what is only implied by the force of what is
directly expressed by the words of the texts. The Vedic injunction is of
two kinds:—(a) There is one kind of injunction which is directly
expressed by the words; *e.g*., ‘desirous of Brahmic glory, one should
offer the *Saurya-Caru*’; here what is expressed is that one who desires
Brahmic glory is the ñt and proper person to offer the *Saurya-Caru*;
and when one proceeds to secure Brahmic glory by means of the said
offering, he learns that the procedure of the offering is analogous to
the *Āgneya* offering (which is the archetype of all *Caru-offerings*).
In both these cases the idea got at, being derived from the words of the
texts, is regarded as ‘derived directly from words;’ though the former
is derived directly from the words and the latter from what is
‘expressed by the worlds,’ yet, this difference, due to the removal of
the latter by one step, does not deprive it of the character of ‘being
derived from words.’ For instance, when the water in the pool is struck
by the hand, and it in its turn strikes against some other place; and
yet this latter place is regarded as being struck by the hand, though
not directly; similarly when pieces of rubber are thrown down, they rise
and fall, and all the subsequent acts of rising and falling are the
indirect effects of 'the first downward impulse imparted to them.
Exactly analogous is the case of the injunctions in question: Every
ectypal sacrifice is related to a particular form of procedure (borrowed
from its archetype). Similarly when we meet with the injunction ‘one
should perform the *Viśvajit* sacrifice,’ we argue that no injunction is
possible except in reference to a fit and proper person capable of (and
having a motive for) performing it, and hence come to the conclusion
that the person so capable is one who desires Heaven; this idea being
thus implied by the force of what is directly expressed by the words of
the text. It is in view of this two-fold character of injunctions (and
enjoined acts) that we have the term ‘entire.’ In fact the purpose of
adding the epithet ‘entire’ is to indicate that *Smṛtis* have their
source in the Veda. This we shall explain under Discourse II.

An objection is raised:—
