+++
title = "004 स तैः"

+++
‘*He*’—Manu—‘*possessed of illimitable being thus questioned by the
high-souled Great Sages, answered them*—“*Listen*.”’

‘*Thus*’—in the aforesaid manner; the word ‘thus’ which denotes
*method*, includes the *matter* as well as the *manner* of the question;
hence ‘*thus questioned*’ means ‘thus questioned, *i.e*., questioned
about Duties—he answered.’

Or, the word ‘thus’ may be taken as denoting *manner* only. As a matter
of fact, however the word ‘*questioned*’ already brings to the mind the
details (matter as well as manner) of what has been questioned about;
hence the meaning is—‘what he was questioned about, that he answered
thus the *question* and the *answer* come to have the same objective.

Under this explanation the word ‘thus’ become super fluous, and only
serves the purpose of filling the gap in the metre. Under the former
explanation however, the word ‘thus’ itself serves the purpose of
showing that the ‘questioning’ and the ‘answering’ have both the same
objective.

The word ‘*Samyak*,’ ‘*with proper courtesy*,’qualifies the *answering*:
‘he answered with proper courtesy’—*i.e., gladly*, not with anger or any
other form of displeasure.

‘*Possessed of inimitable vigour*’—with undiminished power of speech; he
whose vigour,’ power, capacity of exposition, is ‘illimitable,’
infinite.

The epithet ‘*high-souled*,’ serves to show that there is no
incompatibility in the persons being ‘Great Sages,’ and at the same time
‘questioners’ (as if they themselves did not know what they were asking
about); hence it is said ‘he answered the Great Sages.’ It is the
philanthropic person that is called ‘high-souled,’ hence the meaning is
that though they themselves knew all about Duties,—otherwise they would
not be ‘Great Sages,’—yet they questioned Manu for the benefit of other
people; the idea in their minds being as follows—‘Manu is a Sage whose
authoritative character is better known,—what he says is always
respected by people,—he is always approached with trust and
confidence,—hence for the expounding of the treatise, we shall make him
our Teacher’,—and when he is questioned by us, he will be regarded by
the people as still more trustworthy.’

It is this explanation that justifies the statement in the text
regarding Manu having ‘*received them with reverence*.’ If it were not
as we have explained, what would be the meaning of the ‘reverence’ shown
by the Teacher to the Pupil? The word of the text which means ‘having
received with reverence’ must be explained as a participle formed of the
root ‘*arc*’ (to worship) with the prefix ‘*ā*’ and the participial
affix ‘*lyap*’ \[as without the prefix, the form would be
‘*arcayitvā*’\]. Another reading (which removes the difficulty) is
‘*tān*.’

In connection with the present verse, the following question has been
raised—“If the whole of this Treatise has been composed by Manu himself,
it is not right to attribute it to another person, as is done in the
statement—‘being questioned by them, *he* answered’; the proper form
would have been—‘being questioned by them, I answered.’ If, on the other
hand, someone else is the author of the Treatise, then why should it be
called ‘*Mānava*’ (of Manu)?”

There is no force in this objection. In the first place, it is a well
known fact that in most cases the authors of Treatises state their own
views as if emanating from other persons,—making use of such expressions
as—‘in this connection *they say*’ or ‘*they* meet this argument thus,’
and so forth; and the form ‘being questioned by them *I* answered’ would
not be in keeping with such usage; the reason underlying this fact is
that the older the person the more authoritative he is regarded to be by
the people; it is for this reason that we find Jaimini (1.1.5) stating
his own view as emanating from ‘Bādarāyaṇa.’

Or (another explanation is that) the Treatise is a compilation made and
related by Bhṛgu; and since the original *Smṛti* \[which is, in the
present Treatise related by Bhṛgu\] was compiled (from teachings
received directly from Prajāpati) by Manu,—it is styled ‘*Manava*’ (of
Manu).

He answered the great sages;—what was the answer?—‘Listen to what I have
been questioned about.’ (4).


