+++
title = "005 आसीद् इदम्"

+++
At the very outset there arises an objection—

> “Where we began and whereto we are carried! Manu was asked to expound
> the duties laid down in the scriptures, and he promised to expound
> them; under the circumstances, the description of the world in its
> undifferentiated state (with which the present verse begins) is wholly
> irrelevant and purposeless. In fact it becomes a true case of the
> well-known proverb —‘ Being questioned about mangoes, he describes the
> Kovidāra tree.’ Further, there is no authority in support of what is
> here described; nor is any useful purpose served by it. So the whole
> of this First Discourse need not be studied at all.”

Our answer to the above is follows:—What the First Discourse does is to
describe the fact of the Treatise having an extensive scope; so that
what is described here is the whole range of the cosmic process,
beginning with Brahman down to the inanimate objects, as forming the
basis of *Dharma* and *Adharma*, Right and Wrong; for instance, verse 49
describes the vegetable objects as ‘wrapped in manifold Darkness, the
result of their own acts’ \[which shows that plants also are related to,
and affected by, Right and Wrong\]; and later on, again in Discourse 1,
verse 23, it will be stated that ‘having recognised, by means of his
intellect, these transitions of the individual soul, through merit and
demerit, (Right and Wrong), one should fix his attention upon the
Right.’ From all this it follows that Right is the cause of superiority
(in the scale of existence) and Wrong of the reverse; thus the present
treatise, expounding the exact nature of Right and Wrong, serves an
extensive purpose, and as such should be studied. Such is the purport of
the First Discourse.

The authority for what is declared in the present verse consists of
*Mantra, Arthavāda* and *Inference*. As for the *Mantra* we have the
following (in *Ṛgveda*, 10.129.3)—‘Darkness existed, enveloped in
darkness, uncognised in the beginning; this whole existed in a fluid
state; the gross was contained in the subtile; the one entity that
existed came to lie born, by virtue of austerities.’ The meaning is as
follows:—‘At the Universal Dissolution, the Sun, the Moon, the Fire and
other sources of light having been destroyed, there existed Darkness
alone;—this (subtile) Darkness was ‘enveloped,’ wrapped, in Darkness in
the gross form; at this time there was no cogniser; hence, there being
no one to cognise things, there was no *cognition* of anything;
therefore Darkness is described as enveloped in darkness;—‘in the
beginning,’ *i.e*. before elemental creation, it was ‘uncognised,’
unknown; ‘this whole existed in the fluid state,’ *i.e*. every active or
mobile object was motionless; the ‘gross,’ the larger, ‘was contained in
the subtile,’ the smaller; *i.e*. every differentiated object was
resolved into its original evolvents; this indicates the
undifferentiated state of the world; and the last foot of the Mantra
describes the earliest stage of evolution; that ‘one entity’ which
‘existed’ ‘came to be born, by virtue of austerities,’ *i.e*. by the
force of austerity it became manifested in differentiated forms; *i.e*.
under the influence of past acts, it came into existence again; or, it
may mean that under the conditions described, Hiraṇyagarbha, came into
existence by himself, by virtue of his austerities; as described later
on (verso 6)—‘Thereupon the self-born &c. &c.’

The possibility of Universal Dissolution is proved by Inference: That
which has been found to bo destroyed in one part is also found to be
destroyed in its entirety; *e.g*. at one time a single house is found to
be burnt, and at another time the entire village is burnt (this is the
Major Premise); all such things as are produced by active agents,—such
for instance, as houses, palaces and the like are found to be liable to
destruction (this is the second step in the inferential process);—this
world, consisting of rivers, oceans, mountains &c., is the work of an
active agent (this is the third step);—hence it follows that, like the
house &c., the whole world will come to destruction (this is the final
conclusion). It will not be right to argue that the fact of the world
being the work of an active agent is itself not yet established;—for
that fact also is deduced from the fact of the world having, like the
house and such things, a particular shape;—all this constitutes the
Inference (upon which the statements in the present verse are based).

We do not make any attempt either at clarifying (discussing and
strengthening) the said proofs, or at refuting (the counter-arguments);
because the present treatise does not deal with proofs and reasonings;
and reasonings could not be fully grasped until they have been fully
stated and examined; and if all this were done, the work would become a
treatise on ‘Reasonings,’ not on ‘Law;’ and further, it would become too
prolix.

This subject (of Creation and Dissolution) in its details shall be found
described (in verses 7 *et seq*.) and the process described shall be in
some places in accordance with the Purāṇas and sometimes in accordance
with the *Sāṅkhya* doctrines. But the knowing or not knowing of those
details does not make any difference in *Right* and *Wrong*; hence we
are not going to deal with it in detail. If any person stands in need of
the detailed account of the process, be should search for it in the said
sources of information. What we undertake to do is to construe and
explain the words of the text, and this is all that we shall do. A brief
exposition of the purport of the Discourse we have already given.

‘*This*,’ world, ‘*was in exitence*,’ ‘*in the form of dense
Darkness*’—*i.e*. as if it were dense darkness; the term ‘which has
several meanings, is here used to denote *similarity*; just as in the
statement ‘*yat tad bhinneṣvabhinnam chinneṣvachinnam sāmānyabhūtam sa
śabdaḥ*’ (‘that which remains the same even though the things denoted by
it are diverse; which remains undestroyed even when the things denoted
are destroyed, *which is, as if it were, a Generality*, this is the
Word’), the word ‘*samānyābhūtaḥ*’ means ‘as if it were a generality.’
“What is it that constitutes the similarity of the World to Darkness?”

The answer is given by the next word ‘*unperceived*;’ in as much as all
the products with their diverse differentiated forms are at the time
resolved in the Evolvent Original, the world is *not p* *erceived*.

It might have been cognised by means of Inference; but that also is not
possible; as it is ‘*undifferentiated*’; the ‘differential’ meant is
that character which distinguishes one thing from another; and this also
is dissolved at the time; for the simple reason that all products, with
their distinguishing features, have been destroyed.

‘*Incogitable*’—that form in which the World existed was not capable of
being even thought of, in that form; ‘cogitation’ here stands, for all
forms of Inference; the meaning being that at the time there was no kind
of Inference—neither from generals to particulars, nor from particulars
to generals—available, by means of which the World could be
cognised.—For these reasons it was also ‘*incognizable*.’

From all this it might follow that the World did not exist at all, and
it was only a non-existent World that came into existence
(subsequently); with a view to preclude this, the text adds—‘*as if
wholly merged in deep sleep*.’ As a matter of fact, the *existent* can
never come into existence out of the *non-existent*; it has been
declared in the Upanisads (the *Chāndogya*)—‘O dear one, this was, in
the beginning existent; how could the existent be born out of the
non-existent?’—All that is meant is that the World is incognizable by
the instrumentality of the ordinary means of cognition, which operate
through, and bear upon, only differentiated things; that such is its
condition is known from the scriptures, which also are as transcendental
in their character as the ante-natal condition of the World.

‘*As if merged in deep sleep*,’—‘deep sleep’ stands for that condition
of repose which is beyond the conditions of waking and dreaming; and it
has been cited only by way of illustration; the meaning being—‘just as
the soul, in the condition of deep sleep, remains entirely unconscious
of any thoughts or sufferings, and free from all notions of
diversity,—and yet it cannot be said to be non-existent, because on
waking, it is recognised as being the same that was asleep, as shown by
the idea *I have slept soundly*,—exactly the same is the case with the
World, as is shown by the scriptures that describe things as they have
actually existed, and also proved, for those who depend upon reasonings,
by what appear to be sound Inferences.’

‘*Was in existence*’—the past tense has been used, because the condition
described can never be known by any person; hence it is that it has been
described as ‘incognizable.’

‘*Wholly*’—this shows that the dissolution is not *partial* but *total*.
(5)


