+++
title = "007 यो ऽसाव्"

+++
‘*He*, *who*’—these two pronouns refer to something well-known, that is
(in the present context) the ‘Supreme Brahman,’ he who is described, in
the Vedanta texts as also in other philosophical systems, in the
Itihāsas and Purāṇas, as having the qualities going to be described in
the present verse.

‘*He appeared by himself*’—*i.e*. took a body for himself; the root
‘*bhā*,’ having several meanings, is here used in the sense of *coming
into existence*; or, it may be taken in its usual sense of *shining*;
the meaning being that he was self-effulgent, and did not need the light
from the sun or other sources.

‘*Atīndriya*’ means that which is *beyond the senses*, the compound
being taken as an *Avyayībhāva*; the compound ‘*atīndriyagrāhyaḥ*’ being
included under the general rule of compounds formulated in Pāṇini’s
*Sūtra* 2.1.4; the mean ing being that *he is apprehended beyond the
senses*, he never comes within range of the senses; it is an entirely
different kind of cognition, the intuitive cognition of the *yogin*, by
which he is apprehended. Or, the compound ‘*that which is beyond the
senses*’ may be taken as standing for the *Mind*, which, being
imperceptible, is not perceived by the senses; it is for this reason
that the *Vaiśeṣikas* have held Mind to be ‘cognisable by means of
Inference,’ as stated in the *Nyāya-sūtra* (1.1.16)—‘The fact that
cognitions do not appear simultaneously is indicative of the Mind.’ And
it is by means of this Mind alone that the said Being is apprehended.
Says the revered Vyāsa also—‘He is not perceptible by the eye, nor by
the other senses; he is apprehended by means of the clear Mind, by
persons endowed with subtle powers of cognition’;—*i.e*. not sullied by
the defects of passion &c.;—by persons who have acquired the powers of
subtle perception, by virtue of their being entirely devoted to the
worship of the said Being.

‘*Subtile*’—*i.e. as if* he were ‘subtile,’ small; inreality he is not
the substratum of any such finite or concrete predications or concepts
as ‘large’ or ‘small;’ he is, in fact, beyond all such predications; as
is declared in the following passage—‘He is free even from the semblance
of all predications; he has been variously conceived of on the strength
of scriptures and inference, he is beyond all taint of duality, beyond
affirmation and denial, beyond sequentiality and non-sequentiality,
beyond reality and unreality; he is the very soul of the universe, and
becomes cognised only by means of discriminative wisdom.’

Because he is ‘subtile,’ he is ‘*unmanifest, eternal*;’ being of subtile
nature, he is endowed with beginningless and endless puissance, home
people have held that the position of ‘Hiraṇyagarbha’ is attained by
(ordinary beings) through (meritorious) acts; according to these people
also he is ‘everlasting,’ in the sense that, though lie has beginning,
he has no end; because his condition, which consists in being the
experiencer of the fruits emanating from his original act of bringing
about creation, never comes to an end.

Ho is described as ‘*absorbed in all created things*’ in the sense that
he is the very soul of things, having his mind intent upon the idea that
‘all things are to be created by me;’ when for instance, the jar made of
clay, having its body built out of clay, is said to be ‘absorbed in
(consisting of) the clay;’ similarly when a certain person ponders too
much over a thing, he is described figuratively, as ‘absorbed’ in that
thing; as we find in such expressions as—‘this person is absorbed in
women,’ ‘he is absorbed in the Ṛgveda,’ ‘he is absorbed in the
Yajurveda,’ and so forth. Or, it may be in view of the *Advaita*,
‘Nondualistic,’ Philosophy, by which sentient as well as insentient
tilings have no existence apart from Hiraṇyagarbha, all being his
illusory modifications; so that these modifications consisting of the
created things, and these being non-different from him, it is only right
that he should be described as ‘absorbed in (consisting of) created
tilings.’—

“But how can the single entity undergo illusory modifications? It would
be inconsistent with its unity.”

The answer given by the upholders of the theory of ‘illusory
modifications’ is as follows:—When the surface of the sea is struck by
the winds, high waves rise out of it, and these waves are not entirely
apart from the sea, nor are they totally absorbed in it; and they cannot
be described as either ‘different’ or ‘non-different’ from it; exactly
similar is the case with the ‘illusory modifications’ of Brahman.

The term ‘also’ may also be supplied to the words of the text; the sense
being—‘even though, in his own pristine form, he is imperceptible, he
becomes perceptible in the form of the ‘modifications;’ similarly with
the epithet ‘*subtile*;’ the implication of ‘also’ being that he is
gross in the form of the grosser modifications; similarly, he is
‘*unmanifest*’and *also* ‘manifest,’ ‘eternal’ and *also* ‘not eternal,’
‘*absorbed in created things*’ and *also* ‘free from their forms (and
limitations);’ all this being in reference to him in the condition of
‘modifications.’

‘*Inconceivable*’—*i.e*. his character is marvellous, he being possessed
of remarkable powers.—(7)


