+++
title = "009 तद् अण्डम्"

+++
First of all Primordial Matter develops in the form of Clay; *i.e*., on
account of the contact of Hiraṇyagarbha’s ‘seed,’ it become solidified;
and this is what is described as having become an ‘*egg*.’—‘Golden,’
gold, made up of gold; *i.e*., in its brilliance it resembled the thing
made of gold.

“But this statement (that the egg was of gold) is contained in the
scriptures, and we do not find any such term as ‘like’ or ‘resembling’
(which would have justified the interpretation of ‘golden’ as
*resembling* *gold*),—how then can we, in the absence of any other
authority, explain the term figuratively?”

Our answer to the question is as follows:—Later on we find the
statement—‘by means of the two forces, he created Heaven and Earth’
(Verse 13); and as a matter of fact, this Earth is found to consist of
clay, and not of gold entirely; and it is in view of this fact that we
have taken the epithet ‘golden’ figuratively.

‘*Sahasrāṃśuḥ*,’ lit. ‘thousand-rayed,’ is the Sun;—‘*aṃśu*’ means
*rays*; and the resplendence of the egg was like that of the rays of the
Sun.

‘*In that egg he himself was born*,’ came into existence, *as
Brahmā*,’—Brahmā is Hiraṇyagarbha himself;—the exact signification of
the term ‘himself’ has already been explained; the meaning is that he
had originally (as Hiraṇyagarbha) assumed a body by the force of occult
powers, he gave up that body and entered within the egg.—Or, it may be
that when he created water, Hiraṇyagarbha had no body, hence he took up
a body within the egg.—Or again, the being spoken of as ‘he who’ (in
verse 7) was different from the Brahmā who is described here as being
born in the egg; this would be in keeping with what is going to be
stated (in verse 11) in regard to the latter being ‘created by him,’
*i.e*., created by the Supreme Lord (described in verse 7).

“But (under this last explanation) how could he be said to be ‘himself
born?’—and the text apparently speaks, as ‘Brahmā,’ of him who was
‘*himself born*’ (in the egg).”

This does not affect the position; the son is often called by the name
of the Father, when he is described as the ‘self being born out of
itself.’

The fact of the matter however is that what the Teacher has asserted is
based upon scriptural texts, which have no bearing upon the matter at
all \[for being mere *Arthavāda*, they are not meant to describe what is
directly expressed by the words\]; so Unit we need not lay stress upon
what is said (in the text) in this connection; specially because, so far
as the expounding of Duties is concerned, it does not matter at all
whether Hiraṇyagarbha himself was born in the egg, or he created some
other being.

‘*The grand-father of the whole world*’—is a proper name, applied
figuratively. That it has to be taken so is proved by the fact that the
Being described is not literally the ‘Grandfather’ of the people; what
the attributing of this proper name is meant to indicate is that the
being described is an object of great reverence, the term ‘Grand-father’
being chosen, because the Grand-father commands greater reverence than
even the Father. (9).


