+++
title = "010 आपो नरा"

+++
The Being just described is the same who, here and there in the
scriptures, is described under the name ‘*Nārāyaṇa*,’ as possessed of a
superior degree of creative and cognitive powers, and hence being the
Personal Creator of the world; the mere difference in names does not
necessarily imply difference in the things denoted; so that the Beings
described under the names ‘*Brahmā*,’ ‘*Nārāyana*’ and ‘*Maheśvara* are
one and the same; though they form the objects of diverse forms of
worship, yet they do not differ among themselves; as we shall show under
Discourse XII.

How this is (*i.e*. how *Brahmā* is the same as ‘*Nārāyana*’) is
explained now:—‘*Water is called Nara*.’—described under the name
of,—‘*Nara*.’

In answer to the objection—“There is no such usage current among
experienced persons; nor is it generally known that water is called
*Nara*,”—the Author adds:—‘*Water being the offspring of Nara*,’—the
supreme Being (Hiraṇyagarbha, described in verse 8 as having created
water) might well be known under the name ‘*Nara*,’ *Person*; and water
is his ‘*offspring*;’ hence water is spoken of as ‘Nara,’ the name of
the father is often applied to the child, *e.g*., the ‘sons of
Vaśiṣṭha,’ the revered sages *Tāvabhru, Maṇḍu and Lomaka*, are spoken of
as ‘*Vaśiṣṭhāḥ*’; and such usage is based upon the

figurative identification of the child with the father.—‘*Since*’
because—‘*Water*,’ known as ‘*Nara*,’ was ‘*the first thing created
by*’—or it was his *container* when he lay in the womb (egg)—‘*he is, on
that account, described as Nārāyaṇa*.’

In the sense of ‘*he whose container is* *Nara*’the compound should be
‘*narāyaṇa*;’ but the first vowel may be taken as lengthened according
to Pāṇini’s Sūtra 6.3.134, which justifies such lengthening in several
other cases also,; just as we have in the word ‘*pūruṣa*’ (which is a
variant for ‘*puruṣa*’);—or we may have the lengthening due to the affix
‘*aṇ*’ in the sense of ‘mass’ \[so that *nāra* would be ‘mass of water,’
and ‘he who has this mass of water as his *container*, *ayana*,’ would
he ‘*nārāyaṇa*’\]. (10).


