+++
title = "011 यत् तत्"

+++
The ‘*cause*’ spoken of here is one who is always the never the
*product*; the formation of his body is not dependent upon the will of
any other being; he is endowed with a natural supremacy all his
own;—‘*unmanifest* *and eternal*’ as already explained (under verse
7);—‘*partaking of the nature of the existent and the
non-existent*’;—‘*sadasat*’ stands for the ‘*sat*,’ ‘*existent*,’ *and
the* ‘*asat*,’ *non-existent*’; and the said ‘cause’ is one whose
‘*nature*,’ character, consists of the said ‘existent and non-existent.’

“But how can a single entity partake of the two contradictory characters
of the ‘existent’ and the ‘non-existent’?”

The answer to this is as follows:—In as much as people of the present
day cannot form any idea of such a heing, the cause becomes incapable of
being spoken of as ‘existent,’ and hence is described as ‘*partaking of
the nature of the non-existent*; and yet, in as much as the fact of the
said being being the cause of the entire world is known from the
scriptures, it is described as ‘*of the nature of the existent*;’ thus
the description of Brahman as both (‘existent’ and ‘non-existent’) is
not incongruous, being based, as it is, upon the difference in the
character of the persons conceiving of it.

“As a matter of fact, this is true of all things; everything is
‘existent’ in its own form and ‘non-existent’ in the form of other
things; why then should it be stated that this is not incongruous in the
case of *Brahman* only?”

The answer to this is as follows:—Under the philosophy of ‘Non-duality’
nothing except Brahman being ‘what is that *other thing* which (while
existent in its own form) could be spoken of as ‘non-existent’ *in the
form of Brahman*?

‘*The being produced by that*,’—being brought into existence, being
created within the egg; this Being ‘*is described among people as
Brahmā*’; the being, who is found mentioned in the *Mahābhārata* and
other works as seated hero and there for the purpose of granting boons
to such *Devas*, *Asuras* and *Ṛṣis* as have performed severe
austerities,—he was the first to be created by the afore-mentioned
Supreme Being, the Highest Brahman.


