+++
title = "014 उद्बबर्हात्मनश् चैव"

+++
‘*Manifold*’— of various kinds and forms.

‘*Things*’— all entities.

‘*Who resides*, *pervading*’— all those things.

‘*In him these two subsist*’— The term ‘*sthitaḥ*’ is taken as a
transitive verb, the root ‘*sthā*’ being capable of several denotations.

“Who is ho who resides pervading the manifold things?”

The Supremo Self, who is beyond the animate and inanimate world, of the
nature of Highest Bliss, who is going to be described later on.

‘*United to material substances*’—*i.e*., the five substances.

‘*The Great* *Principle*’— described under [Verse
13](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc202191.html),
as that ‘through which he experiences pleasures and pains.’

‘*The Conscious Being*’— described in [Verse
12](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc202190.html).

These two are said to ‘*subsist*’ in the Supreme Self, because the
entire Universe subsists in It; every effect *subsists* in its cause;
and it is on the basis of this that these two are said to ‘*subsist*’ in
the Supreme Self. Says the revered Vyāsa—‘In this world there are two
*Puruṣas*, the Perishable and the Imperishable; the Perishable one
consists of all material substances, and the unchangeable entity is
culled ‘Imperishable,’—Here the term ‘perishable’ stands for the entire
phenomenal world; and ‘imperishable’ for the Original Cause, which is
also spoken of as ‘Unchanging,’ as in its causal form, it does not
perish even at Universal Dissolution. Or ‘perishable’ may stand for the
Body, and ‘imperishable’ for the ‘Conscious Being’ (*Kṣetrajna*); the
latter being called ‘Unchangeable,’ because till Final Liberation is
attained, he retains his character of being the *doer* (of acts) and
*experiencer* (of results). (Vyāsa goes on)—‘The Highest Puruṣa is
different from these two, and is called the *Supreme* Self, who, being
the infallible Lord, who pervades and sustains the three worlds’
(Bhagavadgītā, 15.16.17).—14


