+++
title = "017 यन् मूर्त्य्-अवयवाः"

+++
‘*Frame*’—body; the ‘*components*’ of it are those things that
constitute it; these are ‘*subtile*,’ the ‘*six*’ already described
(*viz*.,the five Rudimentary Substances and the Principle of Egoism),
which are called ‘*aviśeṣa*,’ the undifferentiated. —*Tāni
āśrayanti*—*i.e*., the organs and the elemental substances going to be
described ‘enter into’ the said components; which means that they are
evolved out of them; *i.e*., the evolution of the organs &c., has for
its substratum the six subtile components; this is what has been
described in the words ‘the five elemental substances are produced out
of the five Rudimentary Substances’ (*Sāṅkhya-Kārikā*, 22). Because they
enter into them, therefore the ‘frame of that,’ *i.e*., of Primordial
Matter,—has been described as ‘Body.’

*Manasviṇaḥ*, ‘*maṇīṣā*’ is *wisdom*; those possessed of wisdom are
‘*manasvins*,’ *i.e*., *the wise ones*.

\[The above explanation makes ‘*tainīmāni*,’ the organs and substances,
the nominative, and the ‘components’ the objective;—this construction is
found to be incompatible with the nominative ending in ‘*avayavāḥ*,’
‘*components*’; hence the *Bhāṣya* puts forward another construction,
which has been adopted in the rendering of the text.\]—Or, the relation
of the ‘nominative’ and ‘objective’ may be reversed: the ‘subtile
components’ being the nominative, and the ‘organs’ the objective (of the
verb ‘*āśrayanti*,’); the meaning of ‘*āśrayanti*,’ ‘enter into,’ being
that the subtile components serve as the *substratum*—‘*āśraya*’—of the
organs; just as in the phrase ‘he has been fed (upon) by many men,’ the
man doing the *feeding* is spoken of as ‘fed.’—Or, since verbal roots
may have several meanings, ‘*enter in*’ may be explained as
‘produce.’—(17)


