+++
title = "018 तद् आविशन्ति"

+++
‘*Attachment to sensual objects*’—being addicted to such things as are
forbidden. From this arise ‘*evils*’—the results of sins;—having
experienced the hellish torments, which constitute these ‘evils’—the men
have their ‘*sins* *destroyed*’—guilt removed,—by that
experience,—‘*approaches those two Glorious Ones*.’

“Which two? In fact the ‘Great Principle’ and the ‘Conscious Being,’
which form the subject-matter of the present context; but from the next
verse it appears that it is the Conscious Being who experiences
pleasures and pains; so that the term ‘*he*’ of the text must stand for
that being. And thus the meaning comes to be that ‘this Conscious Being
approaches the same Being,’ which is absurd: the ‘approached’ and the
‘approacher’ being the same.”

True; but the difference intended is an assumed one. In fact, what is
meant by ‘*approaching*’ is that ‘the said Being is all that remains of
the man’; the sense being that as the ‘Conscious Being,’ he was invested
with the aggregate of the ‘life-breath and other accessories, called the
‘Great Principle,’ but after having experienced the results of his
misdeeds, he becomes divested of it, and remains in the form of the pure
‘Conscious Being,’—who has his abode in the Subtle Body only.

Others explain the ‘*two Glorious Ones*’ as standing for the Great
Principle and the Supreme Self.

‘*Conducive to misery*.’—It is only after the sins have been destroyed
that one experiences pleasure; so long as adverse sins are there, even
in the slightest degree, there can be no pleasure; just as when there is
slightest indigestion, there is no pleasure in eating anything.—(18)
