+++
title = "019 तेषाम् इदम्"

+++
All that is meant by saying that ‘*the perishable proceeds from the
imperishable*’ is that the Gross is produced out of the Subtile; and it
is not meant to emphasise whether it is produced out of the particles of
*six* or *seven* Principles; in fact there are twenty-four Principles,
all of which form the cause of the origin of all things. Or, the meaning
may be that in the production of the gross oḥjeot only seven Principles
form the principal cause, *e.g*., the six non-differentiated Principles
(the live Rudimentary Substances and the principle of Egoism) and the
seventh, the Great Principle of Intelligence. Out of these (seven) are
produced the Elemental Substances and the Organs; and when these latter
have been produced, the gross body becomes formed.

\[It has been said that\] from out of the imperishable Primordial
Matter,—which in its unified form, contains within itself the
possibilities of all its evolutes,—is produced this world, which is
multifarious in its character and appears in all possible forms.

Now the question arises—Docs the Primordial Matter become modified into
all its gross evolutes at one and the same time? And the answer to this
is ‘No;’ what really happens is described in the present verse—‘*From
out of the subtile*, &c., &c.,’ The order in which the things are
produced is the same as that which has been described before: that is,
from out of Primordial Matter is produced the Great Principle of
Intelligence;—from this latter the Principle of Egoism; and from this
latter again the ‘group of sixteen’ (*kārikā*, 22).

The term ‘*Puruṣa*’ has been used in the sense of the *Principles*, on
the ground that these latter subserve the purposes of the *Puruṣa*
(Soul).

‘*Exceedingly potent*’—capable of producing their effects; it is because
they are the cause of innumerable products that they have been called
‘*exceedingly*.’

The said principles have certain ‘*subtile constituents of their
frames*’;—‘*mūrti*’ is *frame*; the constituents that go to form that
frame are called ‘*constituents of the frame*’; from out of these is
born ‘*this*’ (the gross Body). It is in reference to this that it is
added—‘*the perishable proceeding out of the imperishable*.’

*Question*—“What are the ‘*subtile* constituents’ of the said
Principles? Certainly the Rudimentary Substances have no other
‘constituents’ (save those that are *subtile*), in reference to (for the
exclusion of) which such specification could be possible (as that
intended by the epithet ‘subtile’).”

*Answer*—The qualification ‘subtile' is not in relation to the
constituents of any single Principle itself; what is meant is that (one
principle is ‘subtile’ in relation to, in comparison to, another,
*i.e*.) the Great Principle of Intelligence is subtile as compared to
the Rudimentary Substances, and the Root Evolvent (Primordial Matter) is
‘subtile’ as compared to the Great Principle.

\[Another explanation of the verse is given below, in the form of an
introduction to verse 20\].—19


