+++
title = "020 आद्याद्यस्य गुणम्"

+++
In the preceding verse some people offer a different explanation of the
number ‘seven’:—(1) The five *organs of sensation*, the Eye and the
rest, taken together from a single group; they are regarded as ‘one’ on
account of their possessing the common character of being *the
instruments of perception*;—(2) similarly the five *organs of action*;
these two, forming two groups, are ‘*two* principles’;—(3-7) the five
elemental substances, being treated individually, by reason of their
functions being distinct from one another, are the ‘*seven principles*’;
and the five Rudimentary Substances and the principle of Egoism are the
‘subtile constituents’ that go to make up the ‘bodies’ of the said
seven;—*i.e*., these seven are the products of evolution from the said
six.—The rest of the verse is explained in the same manner as set forth
above.

Thus, in accordance with this explanation, the Elemental Substances
having been spoken of in the preceding verse (19), the pronoun ‘*eṣām*,’
‘*among these*,’ refers to those same substances. Though there are
several words intervening (between the mention of Elemental Substances
in verse (19) and the pronoun ‘among *these*’ in the present verse),
which are in closer proximity to the pronoun, yet, as a matter of fact,
what Is described in the present verse,—the fact of ‘these’ being
endowed with a particular number of qualities derived from well-defined
sources—is applicable only to the Elementary Substances, and not to
other things; even though these latter may form the subject-matter of
the context (and may as such, be capable of being referred to by the
pronoun in question).

The meaning of the verse thus comes to this:—‘*Among these*’ Elemental
Substances,—which are set out (later on) in a definite order of
sequence, one preceding the other—the ‘succeeding one’ acquires the
quality of the preceding one, through its connection with it.—The term
‘*quality*’ here stands for the five, Sound and the rest;—the
‘*preceding*’ (and ‘succeeding’) is in reference to the order in which
the names of the Elemental Substances are set forth in verse 75 below,
where it is said that ‘first of all Ākāśa is produced &c., &c.’ The fact
of sound &c., being the qualities of these substances will also bo
described in that same verse.—Among Ākāśa and the rest, each one
occupies a definite place in the order in which they are set forth; the
term ‘*yāvatithaḥ*’ means *the number of the place occupied by it*; the
word being formed by the adding of the affix ‘*ithuk*,’ by Pāṇini’s
*Sūtra* 5.2.53. The meaning is that each substance becomes endowed with
as many qualities as the place, *second* or *third*, &c., occupied by
it; that is, the substance occupying the *second* place in the order of
sequence has *two* qualities, that occupying the *third* place has
*three*, and so on.

The first half of the verse means that among the Elemental Substances,
each succeeding one acquires the quality of its predecessor; and each of
them is later on (under verses 75 &c.) described has having one quality
inherent in itself; for instance, ‘Ākāśa is known as possessing the
quality of sound’ (verse 75); ‘Fire is described as possessing the
quality of colour’ (verse 77), and so forth; so that acquiring one
quality from its predecessor (and having one inherent in itself) each
substance would appear to be endowed with only two qualities,—with the
sole exception of Ākāśa (which, having no substance ‘preceding’ it,
would have the single quality of Sound, which is inherent in itself);
hence with a view to preclude such an idea, the author has added the the
second half of the verse—*Each Elemental Substance being endowed with as
many qualities &c. &c*.,—which means that Wind has *two* qualities, Fire
has *three*, Water has *four*, and Earth has *five*.
