+++
title = "021 सर्वेषान् तु"

+++
‘*He*,’ Prajāpati, ‘*designated the names of all things*’; just in the
same manner as people assign names to new-born children, or to other
things also, for the purpose of speaking of them in ordinary business;
as we find done in such assertions as, ‘*āt* and *aich* are called
*Vṛddhi*’ (Pāṇini 1.1.1), or ‘*Dhi-śrī-strī* &c.’ (Piṅgala). What is
meant is that he established a connection between a certain thing and a
certain term,—such terms, for instance, as ‘*ganḥ*’ (Cow), ‘*Aśvaḥ*’
(Horse) and ‘*Puruṣaḥ*’ (Man).

He devised also the *acts*, known as ‘*Dhaima-Adharma*’
(Virtue-Vice),—*i.e*., such acts as the *Agnithotra* and the like which
lead to transcendental results.

Having devised the *acts*, he devised also the ‘*laws*,’ the rules,
governing them; such for instance, as, ‘such and such an act should be
done by the Brāhmaṇa only, at such and such a time, for the purpose of
obtaining such and such a result.’—Or, ‘laws’ may be taken as referring
to the rules governing the ordinary acts with visible worldly results;
such, for instance, as ‘cattle should graze in such and such a place,’
‘this water should not be given for purposes of irrigation of crops to
such and such a village until we have secured such and such a benefit
from it in return.’—He devised also those acts that accomplish only
visible results; but those acts that accomplish transcendental results
he devised on the basis of Vedic declarations.

*Objection*—“As a matter of fact, all things have been created by
Brahmā; and since he is the only independent agent, the proper statement
would have been that ‘he devised the Veda for the purpose of
safeguarding the performaṅce of acts’; in fact the devising of the Veda
by Brahmā is going to be described even in the present context (in verse
23).”

*Answer*—On the subject of the origin of the Vedas, several theories
have been propounded: (1) Some people hold as follows:—Brahmā studied
the Vedas in a previous cycle;—at the following Universal Dissolution,
they disappeared;—in the succeeding cycle at first they were recollected
by Brahmā, just as if he had gone to sleep and had risen from it; in the
same manner as people remember a verse that came to their mind during a
dream;—the Veda having been thus recollected by him, he remembers the
words of such passages as “*gauranubandhyaḥ-aśvastuparo mṛgaḥ*
(Yajurveda-Vajasa. 24.1), and immediately there come to his mind the
things denoted by these words; so that as soon as these things are found
to have come into existence, he decides that, inasmuch as such as was
the name of this thing in the preceding cycle, it may have the same name
in this cycle also. So that he devised the *names* as well as the
*acts*, both *on the basis of the words of the Veda*.—(2) The other
theory is as follows:—Even at universal Dissolution the Vedas do not
disappear at all; they continue to exist for ever, just like the Supreme
Being postulated by certain philosophers. This same Supreme Being
created within the egg the being named Brahmā and taught him the Vedas;
and this Brahmā, *on the basis of the words of the Vedas*, devised every
thing.

What the real truth on this point is we have already set forth above;
while for one who seeks for an account in accordance with the Purāṇas,
we have just described the two theories that have been propounded.

‘*Ādau*,’ ‘*at the outset*’—at the time of world creation;—or, ‘*ādau*’
may be taken to mean ‘ever-lasting,’ referring to those names whose
original form has not become corrupted, as distinguished from such
corrupted names as ‘*gāvī*’ and the like, which owe their origin to the
incapacity of men (to pronounce the corect forms).

‘*Distinct*’—the names designated were in accordance with that
configuration of the body peculiar to each species; what he designated
was not merely a collective name (applicable to all animals),—but a
*distinct* name for each species.—(21)


