+++
title = "022 कर्मात्मनाञ् च"

+++
‘*Living beings intent upon action*’—stands for human beings intent upon
the performance of actions; for the accomplishment of the purpose of
these, ‘*he created the sacrifice*.’ Those men are called ‘*intent upon
action*’ who, not giving themselves up to the worship of Brahman, still
hanker after such results as the obtaining of sons and cattle, etc., and
accepting the philosophy of Dualism, engage themselves in the
performance of actions.—The Genitive ending also (in the words
‘*Karmātmanām prāṇinām*) signifies ‘for the sake of’; hence the meaning
is that ‘he created the sacrifice *for the sake of* the said
beings.’—‘*The hosts of gods*’ also he created for the sake of
sacrifices.—The particle ‘*ca*’ is misplaced after ‘*Karmātmanām*’; its
proper place is after ‘*devānām*’; the meaning thus being—‘He created
the sacrifice, and for the sake of the due fulfilment of the sacrifice,
he created *also* the hosts of gods, such as Agni, Agni-Soma, Indra-Agni
and so forth.—He also created the multitude of the divinities called
‘*Sādhyas*’ ** —the word ‘*gaṇam*’ being construed with ‘*Sādhyānām*’
also. The *Sādhyas* are mentioned apart from the ‘Gods,’ because they
are not entitled to partake of the sacrificial offerings,—they being
entitled only to having hymns addressed to them. That the *Sādhyas* form
a particular class of divinities is shown by such passages as ‘In the
beginning there were the gods named Sādhyas’ (Ṛgveda 10.90.16).—Or the
separate mention of the ‘*Sādhyas*’ may be explained on the analogy of
such expressions as ‘*brāhmaṇa-parivrājaka*’ and the like \[the
‘Parivrājaka’, ‘wandering renunciate’ is a ‘Brāhmaṇa’ with some
qualifications; similarly the *Sādhyas* are *Devas* with the further
qualification that they are not entitled to a share of the
offerings\],—‘*Subtile*’—the multitude of *Sādhyas* is Subtile in
comparison to such deities as the *Maruts* and the *Rudrāṅgirases*.—The
mention of the *Sādhyas* is meant to include all those deities that have
no connection with sacrificial offerings, such, for instance, as *Veno*,
(?) *Sunīti* (?) and so forth.

*\[Another explanation of the verse.\]*

Some people construe ‘*Karmātmanām-devānām-prāṇimām*’ together, taking
them as co-extensive. The ‘gods’ being called ‘*Karmātmānaḥ*’ in the
sense that *they are of the nature of actions*, actions form the very
essence of their nature; they are so called, because they help in the
accomplishment of sacrificial acts, or because they constitute the most
important factor in the sacrificial act. Among the gods there are some
who arc described in the *Itihāsas*, in connection with sacrifices, as
possessed of distinctive forms; to this class belong the gods, Indra,
Rudra and Viṣṇu; there are others who are gods, not in their own forms,
but only at sacrifices; to this class belong the ‘*Akṣa*’ (wheel-axle),
‘*Grāvan*’ (Pebbles) and the *Rathāṅga* (the wheels, or the constituent
parts of the chariot). As regards Indra &c., we find in the
*Mahābhārata* descriptions of such deeds of theirs as fighting with
Vṛttra and other *Asuras*; but there is no description of any such acts
in connection with the Wheel-axle &c.; and yet in the Vedic hymns
connected with sacrificial offerings we find these latter spoken of as
‘deities’; for instance, the *wheel-axles* are referred to as deities in
the hymn ‘*prāvepāmā* &c’; (*Ṛgveda*, 10.34.1); the *Pebbles* are spoken
of as deities in the hymn ‘*praite vadantu* &c.’ (*Ṛgveda*, 10.94.1)—the
Wheels are spoken of as deities in the hymn ‘*vanaspate vīdvaṅgu* *&c*.’
(Ṛgveda 6.47.26).—It is in view of (with a view to exclude) these latter
(which are inanimate) that we have the epithet ‘*prāṇinām*’ (Animate).
There are two kinds of gods; some are animate, others inanimate; *e.g*.,
Indra and others are described in the ‘*Purāṇa*’ as having human bodies
and endowed with life; but the *wheel-axle* &c. are not found so
described. All this conception of the creation of things is based upon
*Itihāsas*. An additional ‘*ca*,’ also, has to be taken as understood;
the meaning being ‘animate and *also* the inanimate.’ According to the
*Nirukta* also there are three kinds of deities—*Horses*, mentioned in
the hymn ‘*mā no mitra* &c.’ (*Ṛgveda*, 1.162.1), *Birds* mentioned in
the hymn ‘*Kanikradat* &c.’ (*Ṛgveda* 5.83.1), and *Bulls* mentioned in
the hymn ‘*āgāvo agman*’ &c. (*Ṛgveda*, 6.28.1);—all these deities are
*animate*; and the *inanimate ones* have been already described.

The epithet ‘*eternal*’ qualifies the ‘*sacrifice*’; the sacrifice
having existed in the previous cycle also, there is a continuity of
tradition in regard to it; and it is on this ground that it is regarded
as *eternal*.—(22)


