+++
title = "023 अग्नि-वायु-रविभ्यस् तु"

+++
There are only three deities, Agni, Vāyu, and Ravi,—say the followers of
the Nirukta; even though these three have several names; and in
accordance with this theory the text would mean as follows:—‘*For the
due fulfilment of the sacrifices*,’ *to these three deities*,—the Dative
ending (in the term ‘*agnivāyuravibhyaḥ*’) being due to the fact of
these three deities being the recipients of the sacrificial
offerings,—‘*he milked the Brahman*,’ called ‘Veda’, ‘*in the forms of
Ṛk, Yajuṣ and* *Sāman*.’

But as a matter of fact, the root (in ‘*dudoha*’ ‘milked’) is one that
should have two objects; it has its primary object in the form of
‘*trayam*’; and it should have a second, the secondary, object; but
there is no such secondary object in the sentence. Hence we conclude
that the term ‘*ravibhyaḥ*’ should be taken in the Ablative case; the
meaning being—‘*From out of the three deities, Agni &c, he
extracted*’—made to flow, produced—\[the Veda\].

*Question*:—“How could the words, the mantra-texts and the
Brāhmaṇa-texts (of which the Veda consists)—which are made up of
letters—come out of Agni and other deities?” *Answer*:—Why is this not
possible? In regard to invisible forces, who can say that they do not
exist?

\[An objection is raised against the second interpretation preferred by
the Bhāṣya\]—“It is not right to alter the meaning of the verb
(‘*dundoha*,’ ‘milked’); so that (if the root retains its own meaning)
how could we havo the Ablative (in ‘*agnivāyuravibhyaḥ*’)? It should
take the Accusative ending, according to the grammatical rule under
Pāṇini’s Sūtra 1.4.51, which lays down that the roots ‘*duhi*,’ ‘*yāci*’
&c., take two objects, and the source from which the ‘milking’ is done
is the secondary object. Further, the mind of reasonable men is not
satisfied when what is described as having happened in the past is
something that is not compatible with the ordinary sources of
knowledge.”

This incongruity becomes explained away when we take the statement as
referring to the framework of the Vedas; the meaning being that the
*Ṛgveda* came out of Agni, the *Yajurveda* out of Vāyu and the
*Sāmaveda* out of Ravi. Then again, it has to be borne in mind that Agni
and the rest are *deities* endowed with superior potencies, and
Prajāpati is possessed of unexcelled powers; so that what can be
impossible for these? Under this explanation full significance should
attach to the Ablative; so that the case-relation being already
expressed (by the Ablative), and the Ablative being duly significant, it
is the Ablative that is used \[and not the Accusative, which has been
laid down in Pāṇini 1.4.51 as to be used only in cases where the
case-relation is *not* otherwise expressed\]; this has been fully
justified in the Bhāṣya (of Patañjali).

*Question*:—“If the said theory be not accepted, what would be the
explanation of the word ‘*agnivāyuravibhyaḥ*’ then?”

*Answer*:—In that case, we have already said that it could be taken as
the Dative; and (as regards the necessity of the verb ‘*dudoha*,’
‘milked,’ having a secondary object) it has to be borne in mind that all
that is here stated is mere *vāda*. So that (physical impossibilities
being not counted) ‘*ātman*’ may be taken as the required secondary
object,—the meaning being that ‘Prajāpati milked himself (of the Veda)’
\[‘*for* *the sake of Agni, and Ravi*’\]. And further, ‘milking’ may be
taken in the sense of *teaching*, which resembles the act of *milking*
in consisting of *transferring a thing from one receptacle into
another*. \[So that the passage would mean that ‘he taught the Veda to
Agni &c.’\] Even when the word ‘*agnivāyuravibhyaḥ*’ is taken as
Ablative, the statement can be justified on the ground that the opening
verses of the *Ṛgveda* speak of Agni,—this fact being what is meant by
the statement ‘the Ṛgveda came out of Agni.’ Similarly, the opening
verse of the Yajurveda is ‘*Iṣe tvorje*’ &c., whore the term ‘*iṭ*’ (the
base in ‘*iṣe*’) means *food*, and food is produced by Vāyu, which is
present within the food, by the bestowing (upon it) of rain; ‘*urk*’
(the base in the second word ‘*urje*’) means *life-breath*, and this is
*Vāyu* (Air) itself; thus since the Yajurveda opens with the description
of the effects of *Vāyu*, we have the metaphorical expression that ‘it
came *out of Vāyu*.’ Or, the duties of the *Adhvaryu* and the functions
of the *Ṛtviks* (which form the subject-matter of the *Yajurveda*) all
consist of so many forms of activity; and all activity proceeds from
*Vāyu*; hence it is on the basis of this similarity that the Yajurveda
is spoken of as *coming out of Vāyu*. Lastly, as regards the the singing
of the Sāman cannot be done except by persons specially qualified for
it; hence the *Sāma* *verses* are such as can be duly read by only the
best among men, and Ravi (the Sun) occupies the highest point in space
\[and on this fact is based the statement that the *Sāmaveda* came out
of *Ravi* \].—(23)


