+++
title = "025 तपो वाचम्"

+++
‘*Happiness*’—Satisfaction of the mind ‘*Desire*’—Longing or Love; the
rest are well known.

‘*He created this creation*’ comprising the things mentioned and others
of the same kind.—The term ‘*this*’ refers to the creation of things
mentioned in this verse as also that described in the foregoing verses.

‘*Being desirous of bringing into existence these creatures*’—such, for
instance, as the *Devas* and *Asuras*, the *Yakṣa*, the *Rākṣasa*, and
*Gandharva* and other beings, the vehicle of these beings, in the form
of the body equipped with the soul and characteristics, and also Dharma;
these he created first of all.

“What sort of verbal expression is this—‘*he created the creation*’?” It
means exactly what is meant by the expression ‘he wrought or did the
creation’; as a matter of fact, all verbal roots express some particular
form of *action*, denoted by the root ‘Kṛ’; *e.g*., ‘cooks’ is
synonymous with ‘does the cooking; ‘sacrifices’ is the same as ‘does the
sacrificing’; in the expression under question the peculiar form of the
*action (of creation*) having been already expressed by the verbal noun
(‘creation’), the root contained in the verb (‘created’) comes to denote
only the *action*. To guard against such an expression living open to
the charge of being a needless repetition, involved in the *action*
being spoken of by means of the root in the verb, after it has been
already expressed by the verbal noun,—we may take the mention of the
verb to be for the purpose of expressing the tense and the voice (which
could not be expressed by the verbal noun).—Or, the term ‘creation’ may
be taken as standing for the particular created things known by the
ordinary means of knowledge and forming the object of the general act of
*creating* expressed by the verb ‘created’; such usage being analogous
to the expression ‘*svapoṣam puṣṭaḥ*,’ ‘reared the rearing by oneself’
(where the rearing qualified by ‘self’ forms the object of the verb
‘reared’, which denotes *rearing* in general).—(25)
