+++
title = "026 कर्मणाञ् च"

+++
‘*He differentiated Virtue and Vice*’—He fixed their character by due
distinction, *i.e*., as distinct from each other; in such form—‘this is
*Virtue*, that is *Vice*.’

*Objection*:—“In reality however, there is no such hard and fast
distinction; there are several actions that partake of the nature of
both and are both *virtuous* and *vicious* (sinful); for instance, they
say that the actions (of sacrifice) laid down in the Veda are of mixed
character, being accomplished, as they are, by means of
animal-slaughter; the sacrifice for instance, is by itself a *virtuous*
or meritorious act, but by reason of animal-slaughter forming one of its
factors, it is *vicious* or sinful.”

It is in view of this objection that the text has added the phrase—‘*For
the due discrimination of actions*’;—the term ‘action’ here stands for
the actual process, the performance of actions; as a matter of fact, the
same *act*, if *performed* in a different manner, acquires an entirely
different character; *i.e*., an act which is *virtuous* (when done in
one way) becomes *vicious* (when done in another way), and *vice versâ*;
*e.g*. the act of animal-slaughter itself; animal-slaughter, when done
apart from a sacrificial performance, is *vicious*, sinful,—forming as
it does the subject of such Vedic prohibitions as ‘One should not kill
any animals’; but when done within the sacrificial altar, during the
*Agnīṣomīya* offering, *it in virtous*, meritorious—being an act that
forms the subject of injunctions. Similarly, Austerity (in itself) is
*virtuous*; but when it is performed through hypocrisy, or by a person
unfit for performing it, it is *vicious*. Similarly again, for women,
intercourse with the husband’s younger brother is *sinful*; but when
under orders from her elders, a woman desiring children has intercourse
with her brother-in-law, who is besmeared with clarified butter &c. (as
laid down in the scriptures), it is *virtuous*. Thus then, even though
the action be one and the same, there is a distinction based upon the
way in which it is actually performed. The sameness of the action
however is only apparent; in view of other sources of knowledge the acts
(done in different ways) are different.

Further, the term ‘*action*’ may be taken as standing for the *effects*
of the actions,—the cause being figuratively spoken of as the effect.
Thus the meaning comes to be as follows:—‘He differentiated actions for
the due discrimination of the *effects of actions*.’

In view of the question as to what is the ‘discrimination of the effects
of actions,’ it is added—‘*he connected them with pairs of opposites, in
the shape of Plensure-Pain and the like*’;—‘Pleasure’ being the effect
of ‘Virtue’ and ‘Pain’ of ‘Vice.’ It is thus that people performing both
kind of actions become associated with these pairs of opposites; by
performing virtuous acts they become associated with pleasure, and by
performing vicious acts they become connected with pain.

The term ‘*dvanḍva*’, ‘*Pair of opposites*,’ is, by usage, applied to
such mutually contradictory sources of pain as ‘Heat-Cold,’ ‘Rain-Hot
weather,’ ‘Hunger-Satiation,’ and so forth.

The phrase ‘*and the like*’ refers to the general and special forms of
the said sources of pain. For instance, the terms ‘Pleasure-Pain,’ in
their general form are denotative either of ‘Heaven-Hell,’ or of
‘excessive joy and sorrow’; while in their special form, they stand for
the ‘obtaining of heaven, of landed property, of sons, of cattle and so
forth (‘*Pleasure*’) and the ‘being deprived of these’; all these being
implied by the terms ‘*Ādi*,’ ‘*and the like*.’

The creation of Actions having been described before (in Verse 18 *et
seq*.), what is described in the present verse is that Prajāpati brought
about the distinction in their actual performance, as also the
discrimination of their effects; thus there is a difference between what
was said before and what is said now.—(26)


