+++
title = "029 हिंस्राहिंस्रे मृदु-क्रूरे"

+++
The meaning of this verse is as follows:—Even though Prajāpati, being
the supreme director of the creation of things, can create living
creatures just as he chooses, yet, as a matter of fact, he creates them,
not without reference to the actions done by them during the preceding
cycles; he makes the creature born in that family of creatures which is
indicated by the act done by it during the previous cycle,—and never in
any other family; if the creature has, in the past, done a good act, it
is led to be born in a family in which it would be enabled to experience
the good results of that act,—in such families for instance, as ‘God,’
‘Man’ and so forth; if, on the other hand, the acts of the creature have
been bad, it is born in such families as ‘animals,’ ‘evil spirits’ and
the like. What happens is that at the beginning of each new creation,
the acts done by creatures in the previous cycle come out, after having,
during Dissolution, lain latent within their source; just in the same
manner as the Elements, the Organs and the Constituent Attributes come
out at the beginning of each creation, after having lain latent within
their source, in the Boot Evolvent. And the reason for this lies in the
fact that the law relating to the ‘residue of the past’ (affecting the
future) applies with equal force to the case in question also.

*Question*:—“If the coming into existence (of a creature) is dependent
upon its own past acts, where then does the almighty power of Prajāpati
come in? Of what sort too would be the almighty power which is dependent
upon extraneous influences?”

*Answer*:—It is only when the said almighty power is there and (active)
that the world comes into existence; how then can the said power he said
to have no effect at all? In fact, neither continuance, nor production,
nor dissolution (of the world) is possible except when that power is
present,—the power of God being ever present, at all times. In reality,
what lead to a creature being born are (1) acts done by itself, (2) the
will of Prajāpati and (3) the evolution of the Root Evolvent. It is by
all this set of causes that this world is produced, exists and becomes
dissolved. The mere fact of Prajāpati being influenced by the things
does not deprive him of his almighty power. The case stands upon the
same footing as a king bestowing upon his servants and dependents the
rewards for acts done by them; exactly in the same manner Prajāpati
assigns to each creature what is in accordance with its previous acts;
and yet neither the King nor Prajāpati cease to be ‘all-powerful.’

*Objection*:—
