+++
title = "030 यथा र्तु-लिङ्गान्य्"

+++
In support of what has been said in the foregoing verses, an
illustration is cited. Just as even inanimate things have their
character fixed by the law of God,—so animate beings also do not go
beyond the law laid down by Prajāpati, in accordance with the past acts
of men; they have recourse to that same line of action which has been
assigned to the family of beings in which they are born; any other line
of action they cannot take up, even though they may wish to do so.

‘*The seasons*’—Spring and the rest;—‘*its own seasonal
characteristics*’—in the form of leaves, flowers, cold, heat, rain and
so forth.—‘*at the approach of the turn*’—when the *turn*, the occasion
for functioning, of a particular season arrives,—that season acquires
its character, by itself; and it does not stand is need of any act of
man. For instance, at the advent of spring, mango-blossoms bloom forth
by themselves, and they, do not stand in need of watering at the roots.
In the same manner the ‘lines of action’ of men—which exist in their
‘unseen’ or latent form—\[operate by themselves\]. As a matter of fact,
there is no such thing as is not affected by the ‘acts’ (of men); for
instance, it is in the nature of the Rainy Season that there should be
rain, and yet on account of the faulty action, either of the king or
kingdom itself, there is sometimes drought. From all this it follows
that the force of ‘action’ is irrepressible.

The frequent repetition of the term ‘*ṛtu*’ season,’ is due to the
exigencies of metre.
