+++
title = "031 लोकानान् तु"

+++
‘*With a view to the development of the regions*.’ terrestrial and the
rest;—‘*development*’ stands for *Nourishment* and *expansion*; it is
only when the four castes, Brāhmaṇa and the rest, are there that there
is development of the three regions; for the Gods live upon offerings
made by these castes,—these castes alone being entitled to the
performance of sacrifices; so that the action done by these nourishes
the two regions (celestial and subterranean); then again, the Gods also
are prompted by men’s action to act; from the Sun-God comes rain; and
thus the said creation (of the Brāhmaṇa) tends to the nourishment of
this (terrestrial) region also.

‘*He brought unto existence*,’—*i.e*., produced, the Brāhmaṇa and other
castes,—‘*from out of his mouth, arm*’, *thighs and feet*’ respectively;
*i.e*., the Brāhmaṇa from out of his mouth, the Kṣatriya out of his
arms, the Vaiśya out of his thighs and the Śūdra out of his feet.—The
affix ‘*tasi*’ (*in* ‘*mukha* *bāhārupādataḥ*’) has the sense of the
Ablative; the effect is, as it were, drawn out of the cause; and this
implying a sort of *separation*, the use of the Ablative becomes fully
justified.

It was only a certain primeval Brāhmaṇa whom Prajāpati produced, by his
divine power, out of the component particles of his own mouth; because
so far as the Brāhmaṇas of the present day are concerned, they are all
actually found to he produced by intercourse between human couples, out
of the material principles.

In reality however, what is stated here is merely commendatory, intended
to show the relative superiority and inferiority of the castes;—the
meaning being—‘of all beings Prajāpati is the highest,—among all the
limbs of Prajāpati, the mouth is the highest,—similarly the Brāhmaṇa is
the highest, most praiseworthy, of all the castes;’ and on the basis of
this similarity the Brāhmaṇa is described as produced out of Brahma’s
mouth.

Or, the description of the Brāhmaṇa coming out of Brahma’s mouth may be
due to the fact that the work of the mouth, such as teaching and the
like, belongs preeminently to the Brāhmaṇa; to the Kṣatriya belongs the
work of the arms, lighting; to the Vaiśya the work of the thighs, such
as wandering about with the cows, when tending cattle, and also
travelling for trade on land and water; and to the Śūdra belongs the
work of the feet, *i.e*., service.—(31)


