+++
title = "047 अपुष्पाः फलवन्तो"

+++
\[The ordinary meaning of the verse is as follows\]—Those trees, in whom
fruits are produced without flowers, are called ‘*Vanasputi*,’ not
‘*Vṛkṣa*’; while those that bear flowers as well as fruits are, by
reason of the presence of both, called ‘*Vṛkṣa*’ As a matter of fact,
however, *Vanaspatis* are also called ‘*Vṛkṣa*,’ and *Vṛkṣas* are spoken
of as ‘*Vanaspati*.’ The particular grounds of such usage will have to
be shown later on.

What we hold however (as to the real meaning of this verse), is as
follows:—The present work does not make it its business to lay down the
meanings of words, in the manner of grammatical works; so that the
meaning of the verse cannot be that ‘those that have such and such a
character are denoted by the word *Vanaspati*, and so forth.’ In fact
what is described here is the manner of the birth of fruits; this
(*manner of birth*) having been put forward (in Verse 42) as the subject
ih hand. The meaning thus is as follows:—Fruits are produced in two
ways: they are produced without flowers, and also from flowers; and
flowers are produced from trees (called *Vṛkṣa*). Thus then, it follows
that, even though the statement is apparently in the form 'those that
bear fruits without flowers are to be known as *Vanaspati*,’—yet in view
of what forms the subject-matter of the context, the ‘*yat*’ (‘which’)
and ‘*tat*’ (‘that’) should be made to change their places; the
construction being—‘those trees that are known by the name *Vanaspati*
have no flowers, and yet they bear fruits’;—*i.e*., in these trees
fruits grow without flowers; this construction is adopted on the
strength of actual facts. Such altering of the construction on the
strength of facts we also find in such cases as the following Though the
actual words are in the form ‘*vāsasā pariveṣṭayeṭ*,’ ‘the post should
bo surrounded with cloth,’—yet in as much as the cloth has got to be
worn by the man, the words are constructed as ‘*stambhe nidhāya vāsaḥ
paridhāpayet*’ ‘the cloth should be hung on the post and then made to be
worn.’

Though what is stated in the present verse is a well known fact (and as
such did not need to be mentioned in the *Smṛti*), yet it has been
mentioned with the purpose of serving as an introduction to what is
going to be stated below in Verse 49—‘*Enveloped in darkness*, &c.
&c.’—(47)
