+++
title = "049 तमसा बहु-रूपेण"

+++
They are ‘*invested*,’ pervaded over, by that ‘Darkness’ (Inertia) of
which the cause is ‘*action*,’ in the form of *vice*;—‘*manifold*,’
being the cause of the experiencing of various kinds of pain. As a
matter of fact, all things are made up of three Constituent Attributes;
so what is meant is that in the beings here described the Attribute of
‘Darkness’ is in excess, and those of ‘Harmony’ and ‘Energy’ are present
in less degrees; hence as abounding in ‘Darkness’ (Inertia), and beset
with pain and humiliation, they continue, for a long time, to experience
the results of their vicious acts.

In as much as the Attribute of ‘Goodness’ (Harmony) also is present in
them, they do enjoy, in certain conditions, small measures of pleasure
also; it is in view of this that they are described as ‘*affected by
pleasure and pain*.’

‘*Possessing inner consciousness*,’—the term ‘*saṃjñā*’ stands for
*Buddhi*, Intelligence (Consciousness); and in as much as activity in
the form of going out, speaking and the like,—which are the effects
indicative of the presence of consciousness,—is absent (in Trees), they
are described as ‘*possessing inner consciousness*.’ This must be the
meaning of the epithet ‘*inner*’; as otherwise, since every person
exercises consciousness only *within* himself \[there would be no point
in the epithet at all\]. Or, the meaning may be that plants are unable
to have any cognisance of the prickings of thorns and other small
things, to the extent that human beings are; in fact for the
experiencing of pain they stand in need of such massive strokes as
*cutting with the axe* and the like;—being, in this respect, like
animate beings in the state of sleep, intoxication or swoon. \[Which
shows that plants have their consciousness lying far deeper within than
in animals.\]—(49)
