+++
title = "050 एतद्-अन्तास् तु"

+++
‘*Ending with those just mentioned*’;—those conditions of life of which
the end, or last, is the condition of the Creeper.—‘*Condition*’—stands
for the connection of the soul with a particular body for the
experiencing of the result of past acts; and there is no worse—*i.e*.,
more painful,—‘condition’ of life than that of Plants; and than the
condition of ‘Brahmā’ there is none higher or superior—*i.e*., more full
of bliss. These ‘conditions’ are attained by means of good and had acts,
respectively called ‘Virtue’ and ‘Vice’; as regards the attaining of the
Supreme Brahman, which consists in Salvation, and is in the form of pure
bliss,—this proceeds either from pure Knowledge, or from a combination
of Knowledge and Action; this we shall describe later on (in Discourse
XII).

‘*In this cycle of births and deaths of created beings*;’—in this
‘*samsāra*,’ cycle, series of births and deaths, of ‘*created beings*,’
conscious entities; *i. e*., in which (ordinarily) the entity is not
born in a genus other than in which it was in the previous
existence;—‘*frightful*,’—full of fear, for those that are careless and
lazy; it is ‘full of fear’ in the sense that there is losing of the
desirable and coming by the undesirable;—‘*constantly*,’ at all
times,—‘*fluctuating*,’ *i.e*., liable to go off, destructible, (hence)
devoid of essence;—it is ‘*ever frightful*,’ *i.e*., it is never not-
*frightful*; it is spoken of as ‘ever *frightful*’ because even when one
has attained the condition of gods, and remains there for a long time,
he has to return to death.

This description of the cycle of births and deaths as being due to
Virtue and Vice serves to show that Scripture serves an all-important
purpose; it has to be born in mind that it is only from Scripture that
we can obtain a knowledge of the distinction between ‘Virtue’ and
‘Vice.’—(50)


