+++
title = "054 युगपत् तु"

+++
This verse has to he explained by reversing the position of ‘when’ and
‘then’; otherwise, from what has been said in the foregoing verses,
there would be mutual interdependence: it has been stated (in Verse 52)
that *when He sleeps then all things vanish* \[and if the persent verse
is taken to mean, as the words suggest, that when the things vanish into
the Great Soul, then this Great Soul retires to sleep, then we would
have the vanishing of things dependent upon his going to sleep, as
stated in 52, and his going to sleep dependent upon the vanishing of
things, as stated in 54\].

‘*Sleeps happy and contented*,’—Happiness forms the very nature of the
Supreme Brahman; hence it is not meant that He is happy during sleep and
unhappy at other times;—of what nature his ‘*sleep*’ is has already been
explained;—as regards his ‘*contentment*,’ that is everlasting;
consisting of pure bliss, this Supreme Soul is never affected by the
waves of agitation that are set up in Nescience. Though (even with all
this) it is possible for him to be the *Creator* of all things. In the
ordinary world, a man retires from his household duties after having
done that he had to do,—with the feeling, ‘I have earned all the wealth
that was necessary for my family; I am free from troubles,’—and thus
sleeps in happiness and contentment, without fearing any trouble to
himself. To such a person is the Supreme Soul compared; this whole world
being in the position of ‘family’ to him;—this being intended as his
praise.

Or \[in order to avoid the necessity of having to reverse the order of
the words\] the verse may be taken as referring to Primordial Matter:
When Primordial Matter sleeps, then all things become absorbed into it
all at once; that is, they become resolved into the form of Primordial
Matter, being reduced to the position of their cause; that is, they are
reduced to a ‘condition in which they cease to undergo
modifications.’—‘*All at once*,’ all things contained in the womb of the
three regions.—The ‘*sleep*’ of Primordial Matter, which is devoid of
consciousness, can mean only *cessation of evolution*, and not
*inhibition of consciousness*;—‘*happiness*’ also is only figurative,
for the same reason that Matter is devoid of consciousness.—(54)


