+++
title = "055 तमो ऽयम्"

+++
Now by means of these two verses the author is going to describe the
dying and the obtaining of another body by the Soul fallen in the cycle
of births and deaths.

‘*Darkness*’—stands for cessation of consciousness (preceding
death);—*entering into*, falling into, this unconsciousness *it remains
for a long time, equipped with the sense-organs; but does not perform
its functions*— of breathing in and out; *then it departs*—goes
out—*from the body*, the corporeal frame.

*Question*:—“As a matter of fact, the Soul is omnipresent, and
all-pervading like *Ākāśa*; so that what kind of ‘*departure*’ is it
that occurs in its case?”

*Answer*,—‘*Departure*’ means only the renouncing of the body that had
been obtained as the result of past acts; and it does not mean that, it
goes from one place to another, like a material object.—Or, the answer
may be, as held by some people, that the ‘*departure*’ spoken of is that
of another and a more subtle body which comes into existence in between
(the two bodies). But this intermediate body is not admitted by others;
as for instance, it has been declared by the revered Vyāsa—‘This present
body having disappeared, the sense-organs forthwith enter into another
body; so that there is no intermediate body.’ Some followers of the
*Sāṅkhya* such as Vindhyavāsin and the rest, also do not admit of an
intermediate body.

“What is this ‘intermediate body’?”

When this (physical) body has been destroyed, so long as a place in the
womb of the (future) mother is not secured, where the second (physical
body) would be formed, there exists during the interval, a subtle body
entirely devoid of all sensation, which cannot come into contact with
any thing, which is not burnt by fire and which is not obstructed by
elemental substances.

Others explain the ‘*mūrti*’ of the text as the Supreme Self. The
Supreme Self, which is the Soul of all things, is like the Ocean; out of
that emerge the Jīvas (Individual Souls) under the influence of
nescience, just in the same manner as waves emerge from the Ocean; and
when the Individual Soul thus emerges out of the Supreme Soul, it
assumes, by virtue of its past Virtue and Vice, a form known by the name
‘*Puryaṣṭaka*’; and this is the ‘subtle body,’ which serves as the
clothing of the Individual Soul. This has been thus declared in the
Purāṇa—‘He becomes united with the *Puryaṣṭaka-* form, which is known as
Prāṇa (Life); when bound up with this, *he is in bondage*, and when
freed from it, he is *released*.’ The ‘*puryaṣṭaka*,’ ‘*eight-fold*’
frame consists of the five life-breaths,—*Prāṇa, Apāna, Samāna*, *Udāna*
and *Vyāna*—the Group consisting of the five organs of sensation, the
Group consisting of the five organs of action, and the Mind as the
eighth. This body is not destroyed, until the condition of Final Release
is attained. This is thus stated (in *Sāṅkhyakārikā* 40)—‘What migrates
is the subtle body, which is devoid of feeling, but invested with
tendencies.’—(55)


