+++
title = "058 इदं शास्त्रम्"

+++
In the present context the term ‘Law’ stands for *the whole collection
of Injunctions and Prohibitions contained in the Smṛtis*, and not for
any particular *treatise*; as this latter was composed by Manu; that is
why the Treatise is called ‘Mānava’ (of Manu); otherwise \[ *i.e*., if
the Treatise were the ‘Law’ propounded by the Imperishable One\], it
would have been ‘*Hairaṇyagarbha*,’ ‘of Hiraṇyagarbha.’

Others however have held that the Treatise itself was composed by
Hiraṇyagarbha \[and is spoken of in the text as the ‘Law’ propounded by
him\], and since it came to be revealed to, and published among, many
persons by *Manu*, it is only right that it should he called after the
name of the latter. For instance, the Ganga has its real source
somewhere else (in Heaven), and yet since it is seen for the first time
in the Himavat (Himālaya), it is called ‘*Haimavatī*’ (proceeding from
Himavat), after the name of the latter;—similarly though the Vedic text
is eternal, yet since it was expounded by Kaṭha, it is called
‘*Kāṭhaka*,’ after his name; even though there are several other
expounders and learners of that Veda, yet it is called after Kaṭha, on
account of the superiority of his expounding. Nārada also has declared
thus:—‘This Treatise, consisting of 100,000 verses, was composed by
Prajāpati, and, in due course, it came to be abridged by Manu and
others.’ Thus, even though the Treatise may have been originally
composed by some one else, there is nothing incongruous in its being
called ‘Mānava,’ ‘of Manu.’ As for the term ‘*Śāstra*,’ ‘*Law*’ (of the
text) standing for the *Treatise*, we often find it so used, in the
sense that the subject expounded by it is *instruction*, ‘*śāṣana*.’

‘*He taught it to me*,’ I was taught by him.—‘*Himself*,’ ‘*first of
all*,’ ‘*with care*,’—these words indicate the fact that there was no
break in the continuity of tradition in regard to the Law. As a matter
of fact, when the author of a book ‘*himself*’ teaches it first of all,
not a single syllable of it is lost; while when the book composed by one
person is taught by another person who has learnt it from the former,
there is not the same ‘*care*’ taken in guarding the text from loss. In
fact, in the case of the author himself, when he has taught it once and
established its position, he feels confident that he has already taught
it once, and hence when he comes to teach the work a second time, he is
likely to be careless and lazy; so that lapses in the text become
possible; hence the text has added the phrase ‘*first of all*’.—‘*With
due care*,’—the term ‘*vidhi*,’ ‘*care*,’ stands here for the quality,
in the teacher and the pupil, of having undiverted attention, a
concentrated mind; and the affix ‘*vati*’ (in the term ‘*vidhivat*’)
signifies *capability, possession*.

‘*Then I taught it to Marīci and other sages*.’—In as much as Marīci and
the other sages are persons of well-known reputation, when Manu speaks
of such well-known persons having learnt the Law from him, he describes
his connection with specially qualified pupils, and thereby indicates
his well-established professional dignity; and by pointing out the
importance of the Law, he produces in the minds of the great sages (who
have asked him in verse 1 *et seq*. to propound the Law) faith and
confidence, so that they may be unremitting in their study; the idea
being—‘So important is this Law that oven such great sages as Marīci and
the rest have learnt it,—Manu also is such a high personage that he is
the Teacher of those great sages,—so that it is highly proper that this
Treatise should be learnt from him with this idea in their minds, the
enquirers who have come to hear the Law propounded would not cease to
give their attention to it.—Both these facts are mentioned with a view
to eulogise the Law.—(58)


