+++
title = "069 चत्वार्य् आहुः"

+++
The ‘*years*’ here spoken of are taken as the years *of the Gods*; as it
is this that has been mentioned last. Says the Author of the Purāṇas—‘O
Brāhmaṇas, all this has been described by the divine measure: the
measure of the Time-Cycles has been described by the divine
measure.’—‘*Four thousand*’ such ‘*years*’ of the Gods constitute the
Time-Cycle known as ‘*Kṛta*’:—of the ‘*Kṛta*’ cycle, ‘*as many*’,
*i*.*e*. four ‘*hundred*’ ‘years’ form the ‘*Juncture*’; and of the same
‘*Kṛta*’ Cycle, the ‘*Juncture-end*’ is consisting of a period of four
hundred years. That period of time which partakes in equal degree of the
character of the preceding as well as that of the succeeding Cycle, is
called ‘*Juncture*’; and ‘*Juncture-end*’ is that period of time which
also partakes of the character of both, but in a less degree, of the
preceding and, to a greater degree, of the succeeding Cycle.

The text contains the word ‘*tāvacchatī*’; and it is necessary to And
out the rule under which the final I has been lengthened. The only
grammatical explanation of the word possible is that it should be
expounded as ‘*tāvat śatānām sa* *māhārah*’, ‘the collection of as many
hundreds’; the term ‘*tāvat*’, ending in the ‘*vatu*’ affix, becomes a
numeral according to Pāṇini’s Sūtra 1.1.23, by which words ending in
‘*vatu*’ are regarded as ‘numerals’; so that the said compound having a
numeral for its first number becomes a ‘Dvigu’, according to Pāṇini
2.1.25; and since the Feminine affix *ṭāp* is precluded from *Dvigu*
compounds, we have the Feminine affix *ṅīp*; and the word ‘*tāvat*’
means ‘one whose measure is *tat* (that)’: it being derived from the
pronoun ‘*tat*’ with the ‘*vatup*’ affix, added according to Pāṇini’s
Sūtra 5.2.39; the vowel in ‘*tat*’ being lengthened by the *sūtra*
6.3.91. If the form ‘*tāvātī*’ were explained in any other way,—for
instance, if it were taken as a *Bahubrīhi* compound, being expounded as
‘*tāvanti śatāni yasyāḥ*’,—then, since the word ‘*śata*’ ends in ‘*a*’,
it would take the Feminine affix ‘*ṭāp*’ according to Pāṇini 4.1.1; so
that the form would be ‘*tāvaccatā*.’ This is the meaning.—(69)


