+++
title = "074 तस्य सो"

+++
Brahmā, having slept daring the long night or the said extent, ‘*wakes
up*,’ and then proceeds to create the world again.—The ‘sleep’ of Brahmā
is of the character already described (in verse 54); and he does not
sleep in the manner of ordinary men, as he is ever awake (conscious).

The order of creation is next stated:—\[He created\] ‘*the Mind, which
partakes of the nature of the existent and the nonexistent*.’

*Question*—“It has been stated above (in verse 8) that ‘at first he
created water’.”

In answer to this some people offer the following explanation:—There are
two kinds of ‘Dissolution’—the ‘Great Dissolution’ and the ‘Intermediate
Dissolution’; and what is stated in the present context is the order in
which things are created after the ‘Intermediate Dissolution’; and the
‘Mind,’ in this case, is not one of the ‘Principles,’—this ‘Principle’
Mind having come into existence already (after the Great Dissolution);
what the text means is that ‘Brahmā’, having woken up,
‘*creates*’—*i.e*., applies—the Mind—to creation.

If, however, the text be taken to refer to the creation following on the
‘Great Dissolution,’—then ‘Mind’ should be taken as standing for the
‘Great Principle of Intelligence,’—it being called ‘Mind’ because it is
the cause of the Mind; and thus the order here mentioned would not in
any way militate against that stated before (in verse 14-15). In the
Purāṇa we read—‘It is described as *Mind, Mahān, Mati, Buddhi* and
*Mahattattva*; all these have been described as words synonymous with
*Mahat* (the Great Principle of Intelligence)’; \[and thus there is
nothing wrong in taking ‘*manas*’ of this verse as standing for the
Great Principle\].—(74)


