+++
title = "081 चतुष्पात् सकलो"

+++
Virtue is that which has “four feet.” What constitutes ‘virtue’ is the
action of sacrifice and the like; and as this latter is something to he
performed, it has no body; hence the word ‘feet’ in the text cannot be
taken as denoting the part of a body; it stands for ‘part’ or ‘factor.’
As a matter of fact, Virtue has no body, either like men or like birds
and animals. Hence what is meant by Virtue having all its ‘four feet’ is
that it is equipped with all its four factors. The meaning of the text
thus is that such virtue as is perfect and equipped with its four
factors existed in the *Kṛta* Cycle.—\[*The* ‘*four factors’ are now
illustrated*\]—At the sacrifice, when it is in course of performance,
there are four priests—viz., the ‘*Hotṛ*,’ the ‘*Brahman*,’ the
‘*Udgātṛ*’ and the ‘*Adhvaryu*’;—of the performers there are *four
castes*, or *four life-stages*. ‘*Virtue*’ as it is described in the
Veda was performed during that cycle in its entire and perfect form;
*i.e*., it was not deficient in even the smallest factor, and it was not
wanting in any of its details. The number ‘four’ is applicable to Virtue
in many ways. For instance, in the case of the action of ‘giving’ also,
there is the giver, the thing given, the recipient and his satisfaction.
Or the ‘four factors’ of Virtue may be sacrifice, charity, austerity,
and knowledge. This would he in accordance with what is going to be
described in verse 86 as regards ‘Austerity’ being the chief virtue in
the *Kṛta age*.

Or, the term ‘*Dharma*’ ‘*Virtue*’ in the text, may be taken as standing
for the *words descriptive of Virtue*; and of such words the ‘four feet’
are the four kinds of words—Nouns, Verbs, Prepositions and
Indeclinables. This is thus declared in *Ṛgveda* 1.164.45—‘There are
four words contained in speech, these the wise Brāhmaṇas know’—(in this
passage) the epithet ‘*manīsiṇaḥ*,’ ‘*wise*,’ stands for those ‘who are
of powerful minds,’ *i.e*., learned, virtuous;—(the passage goes on)
‘these, placed in the cave, do not appear to view,’—*i.e*., are not
perceptible—‘the fourth speech people speak’—the fourth, people versed
in the Veda speak. The meaning of this passage is that—‘in the
beginning, no Vedic sentence was hidden from view, nor was any Vedic
Rescensional Text lost, while now a days, much has become lost.’

‘*So does truth*,’—that is, truth also exsists in its perfect form.
Though truth also, being what is prescribed in the Veda, is a ‘virtue’
(and as such already included in the latter term), yet it has been
separately mentioned with a view to show its special importance, or to
indicate that it forms the basis of all virtues, the performance of
‘virtue’ in its entire form is based upon truth; and those who are
untruthful, perform, for the purpose of gaining popularity, only a part
of what constitutes ‘virtue’ and ignore the rest of it.

‘*By vice*’—*i.e*., by following the prohibited path ,—‘*no benefit*’—in
the shape of either *learning* or wealth,—‘*accrues*’—comes—to the
performer; this is by virtue of the special character of the age.
(During that age) men do not acquire learning, nor do they earn wealth,
by vicious means. Learning and wealth are the means by which virtuous
acts are performed; hence when it is said that these are pure, what is
meant is that this is what tends to virtue being performed in its entire
and perfect form—(81).
