+++
title = "084 वेदोक्तम् आयुर्"

+++
Some people offer the following explanation:—What is meant ‘*the age
spoken of in the Veda*’ is the age of a thousand years and so forth,
which is indicated by the Veda prescribing such rites as are mentioned
as extending over ‘thousand years’; and this age is ‘*obtained*’,
reached, only in accordance with the nature of the Cycle, and not in all
Cycle; for instance, now-a-days no one ever lives for ‘thousand years’
he who lives long, lives for a *hundred* years.

There are others who do not accept this explanation, and for the
following reasons:—It has been decided (under Mīmāmsā-Sutras 6. 7.31-40)
that when the term ‘year’ occurs in the Veda in connection with the long
sacrificial sessions, it stands for ‘days’; so that if something else
(in the shape *of years*) were taken as enjoined, then there would he an
inconsistency, and this would lead to the ‘splitting of the
sentence’;—the text in connection with the subject is in the form
‘*pañcapañc??hatah tṛvṛtaḥ samvatsarāḥ*’, ‘the fifty-five trios, years’
(literally); now hero what is definitely indicated by the context is
that the term ‘trio’ stands for the *three days* of the *??vāmayana*
Sacrifice; so that it is in regard to these that the particular number
(*Fifty-five*) is laid down; under the circumstances, if the sentence,
by virtue of the term ‘*Samvatsarāḥ*’, ‘years’, were taken as laying
down the further unknown fact? the said (*trios*) being ‘years’,—then
there would be a?it in the sentence; in order to avoid this, it becomes
necessary to take one or the other of the words as merely *reite??ive*
(not *injunctive*);—now

as regards the term ‘*Samvatsara*’, ‘year’, we find that, on the basis
of diverse calculations, known as the ‘*Saura*’, the ‘*Sāvana*’ and so
forth, it is often used in a sense other than that of a collection of
exactly *three hundred and sixty day*; so that it is only right that
this term (and not the term ‘*fifty-five*’) should be taken
figuratively, as being descriptive of ‘*days*’.

Others again argue as follows:—Among the *Mantra* and *Arthavāda* texts
of the Veda we find such egressions as—‘The gods live for a *hundred*
years’, ‘the man’s life is of hundred years’, and so forth,—where the
term ‘hundred’ is found used in the sense of ‘*many*’ and ‘man’ is
purely indefinite; hence the meaning (of our text,) is that ‘men are
short-lived or long-lived according to the Cycle’.—If the verse were
taken in its literal sense, it would mean that during *Kali* all men
live for a hundred years, and this would not be true\],—Or, it may mean
that the exact extent of ‘full age’—which is found mentioned as the
result of sacrifices performed by the man desiring *full age*—being
nowhere defined the extent should be taken as determined by the
character of the particular Cycle.

‘*Results*’—i.e., the things desired as results. described in the Veda,
proceeding from acts performed with a purpose.—Though ‘full age’ also is
a *desired result*, yet it has been mentioned separately in view of its
importance; as declared in such words as—‘Full age is the highest
desirable object’.

‘*Power*’—i.e. the superphysio faculties, consisting in being equipped
with *aṇimā* (the faculty of becoming as small as one likes) and such
other faculties’,—or in the form of ability to pronounce effective
curses, as? bestowing effective boons

‘*Are obtained in accordance with the character of the Cycle*’—this has
to be construed with all (three phrases)—(84).


