+++
title = "086 तपः परम्"

+++
The six actions—Vedic Study and the rest—are all conducive to Happiness;
and among these the most efficacious in bringing about happiness are the
Jyotiṣṭoma and other acts prescribed in the Veda.

“If the Genitive ending in the term ‘*pūrveṣām*’ (‘among the aforesaid’)
denotes *selection*,—that cannot be right; as we have ‘selection’ in a
case where among a number of things forming a single group as bearing
equally upon a common objective, one of them happens to be possessed of
some such efficiency as marks it out as pre-eminent; *e.g*., in the
expression ‘*among men*, the Kṣatriya is the bravest’; where the
*Kṣatriya*, who is included in the class ‘men,’ is *selected* as the
‘bravest.’ How, then, can there be any ‘selection’ of what has not been
mentioned at all among those spoken of in the foregoing verse? ‘*Vedic
Act*’ has not been mentioned. It might be argued that—‘since *Vedic Act*
is also included under *Vedic Study*, which has been mentioned, how can
the former be regarded as not mentioned?’ But in that case t he
‘selection’ of a generic entity out of the same generic entity would be
all the more incongruous; one never says—‘among cows, cows are the most
milch.’ ‘Vedic Acts’ could have been *selected* as the *most efficient*
in bringing about happiness only if *Non-Vedic Acts* had also been
spoken of as conducive to happiness. Further, what are the ‘Vedic Acts’
meant here? If it be held that the Jyotiṣṭoma and such sacrificial acts
are what are meant,—then it will be necessary to point out what
authority there is for taking the term as referring to these in
particular; since the ‘Study of the Veda’ and several such acts.also are
‘Vedic.’—In answer to this, the following argument might be brought
forward—‘The *Study of Veda* and such acts are prescribed in the
*Smṛtis* also; and hence they are not *Vedic*; those alone can be called
*Vedic* which are prescribed directly by *Śruti texts* only. Nor do the
Study of the Veda and such other acts come in as the necessary details
of all Vedic Acts. This is what is going to be explained in the next
verse, by the words—*each of those is fully comprised in the performance
of the several rites*’—The answer to this would be that, if the said
acts were not *Vedic*, then it would be difficult to explain their
forming part of the *Agnihotra* and other Vedic rites; so that there
would be no useful purpose served by the mention of these at all. Study
of the Veda and such other acts have to be performed, as also the
*Agnihotra* and other rites; and we do not know in what way one or the
other of these would be ‘more efficient’ in bringing about happiness.
The results of the two sets of actions not being the same, it is not
possible to make any comparison between them on the basis of those
results; as there is in the case of the two acts—*the giving away of a
cow* and the *performance* of the *Jyotiṣṭoma* and other rites, the
former simply leading the agent to Heaven, while the latter is conducive
to a long-continued stay in

Heaven, as has been shown under *Pūrva-Mīmāṃsā Sūtra*, 1.3.17.”

The answer to the above is as follows—As for the argument that the
declaration in question is meaningless,—some people offer the following
explanation:—What is meant by the *Vedic Acts* being *more efficient* is
that whenever there is opposition between what is prescribed in the
*Veda* and what is laid down in the *Smṛti*, the latter is always to be
rejected in favour of the former; this is what has been declared in such
assertions as—‘when two opposite injunctions are of equal strength, the
two courses are to be regarded as optional alternatives, but when they
are of unequal strength, the weaker *Smṛti* is always set aside by the
stronger *Śruti*.’ This is what has been declared under 2.14 above,
where it is stated that ‘when they are two contrary Vedic injunctions
bearing on the same point, both the courses are to be regarded as
lawful; when however there is opposition between *Śruti* and *Smṛti*,
the latter is to be regarded as only reiterative, not injunctive.’

“If this be the meaning of the present verse, then, inasmuch as it has
been already asserted in the text just quoted, why should it have been
asserted again in the present text?”

It has been repeated for the purpose of making the fact clearer; so that
there is nothing wrong in this.

It may be possible to find some other meaning of the present text. But
the actual meaning appears to be as has been just explained. Thus the
meaning comes to be that the ‘Vedic Acts’ are more efficient than those
laid down in the *Smṛtis*,—the mention of ‘Vedic Study’ and the rest
being meant to include all those that are laid down in *Smṛtis*. The
peculiar form of the assertion being due to the exigencies of metre.

Our own view however is as follows:—What is stated here is a fact
established by reasoning; and it is in a friendly spirit that the Author
states, without reference to anything particular, a fact so established.
In fact, what is directly spoken of Is the ‘Knowledge of Self’; what
then could be the need of the mention of ‘Study of Veda’? Writers on
*Smṛti* do not support their statements by their own statements. It
might be argued that—“What are meant to be cited in support are the
declarations of Yājñavalkya, and not those of the writer himself.” On
the strength of the context we take the ‘Study of Veda’ and other acts
as distinct from the *Agnihotra* and other acts prescribed in the Veda.
As a matter of fact, the present declaration is not made with special
reference to the ‘Knowledge of Self.’ All that is done is to take it as
referring to the *Śruti texts* hearing upon the ‘Knowledge of Self.’ And
the purport of it all is that—(a) the ‘Study of the Veda’ and other such
acts prescribed in the *Smṛtis* are good, (b) better than these are the
*Agnihotra* and other acts prescribed in the Veda, and (c) best of all
is the ‘Knowledge of Self.’ If this were not what is meant, then the
whole section would be found to have started with one subject and ending
with a totally different subject.

Another view is that the term ‘*Vedic Act*’ here stands for the
*Knowledge of Self*; and this on the ground that, the whole purpose of
the Veda is the propounding of this knowledge.

As for the Injunctions contained in the Veda regarding the *Agnihotra*
and other such acts,—these are meant to draw on young boys (slowly, to
the undertaking, gradually, of the Higher Knowledge, through the simpler
acts); just as old men lead children on to the drinking of unpleasant
medicines (by beginning with giving them less unpalatable things).

Or, what is meant is that cultured men shall, by means of the
ritualistic acts, shake off their inborn beginningless Illusion, which
is the source of predispositions and attachments to sensual objects,—and
having acquired the faculty of studying the scriptures, they shall in
due course acquire dispassion and thereby loosen the bonds of desire,
finally come to be led on to the highest purpose. In fact, the Vedāntins
hold that the sole purpose of the Ritualistic section of the Veda lies
in thus preparing the agent for the higher purpose. Thus what the
present assertion—‘*the Vedic Act is in every way more efficient in the
bringing about of good*’—points to is the *act* of ‘withdrawing from
activity’ that is going to be spoken of later on.

Or, lastly, whether we accept Duality, or reject it as a dream, and
accept the Non-dual Self as the only real entity,—in either case, the
‘Knowledge of Self’ is the better means (of attaining the highest good).
As for the ‘Study of Veda’ and other acts since they involve the notion
of duality, they have to be performed, since these also have been laid
down in the Veda.

As regards the objection based upon the use of the Genitive ending (in
‘*eṣām*,’ etc.), this has been answered by pointing out that its use is
justified by the explanation that it is based upon a distinction assumed
in the mind; just as we have in the expression—‘*Māthurāḥ
pātaliputrakebhyaḥ āḍhyatarāḥ*,’ ‘the inhabitants of Mathurā are
wealthier than those of Pātaliputra.’

“But in that case the Ablative ending should have been used (instead of
the Genitive in ‘*Ṣaṇṇām eṣām*,’ ‘*among these six*’).”

This has been answered by the remark that there would be no difference
in the denotations of the Genitive and Ablative endings in the present
connection.—(86)
