+++
title = "087 सर्वस्याऽस्य तु"

+++
The ‘*Vedic Act*’ stands, in this verse, for the *Jyotiṣṭoma* and other
acts, and ‘*performance*’ also refers to the actual working out, in
practice, of the details of those same acts that are laid down in the
Veda.

‘*All these*’—the study of the Veda and its esoteric sections and so
forth—‘*are included*’ in the said ‘*act*,’ which comprises them all;
one act being included in one, and the other in another and so forth.

The ‘*act*,’ ‘*karma yoga*,’ having been already mentioned, the
‘*performance*,’ ‘*kriyāvidhi*,’ has been mentioned again, for the
purpose of filling up the metre. Or some distinction may he drawn on the
basis of the different substances —*Soma* and the rest—used at
sacrifices.

(*a*) Now, the ‘Study of the Veda’ is included in the ‘*Sattra*,’
*Sacrificial Sessions*; on the ground that Veda is of use in connection
with all the sacred texts that have to be recited at sacrifices.—(*b*)
‘Austerity’ is included in the *Dīkṣā*, the *Upasada* and the *Soma
sacrifices*.—(*c*) ‘Knowledge’ is included in all sacrifices; as no
sacrifices can be performed by men devoid of *knowledge*.—(*d*) ‘Control
of the sense-organs’ comes in useful in all sacrifices, as it has been
laid down for all sacrifices that ‘he shall not have intercourse with
his wife;—he shall not eat meat’ and so forth.—(*e*) So also
‘Harmlessness’; in view of such declarations as—‘he shall not deprive
any creature, not even the lizard, of its life.’—(*f*) ‘Service of
elders’ also would come in in the same manner.

There are some people who hold that ‘withdrawing from activity’ is the
only ‘*act*’; and the present text serves the purpose of indicating to
these men the necessity of such positive acts as the ‘Studying of the
Veda’ and the rest, ‘*They are* *included*’—That is, these acts also
become included as are of the nature of ‘worship.’ When the Upaniṣads
prescribe expiation for persons devoted to ‘worship,’ they do so for the
purpose of the destroying of sins, and they do not mean to countermand
the act of worship which has been enjoined by Vedic texts. Hence in all
cases, whenever one either omits to do what is enjoined, or does what is
forbidden, he incurs sin.

“Under the circumstances (if all these acts would continue to be
performed), how could there be Liberation?”

Liberation would be attained in the following manner:—(a) The sinful
acts committed during previous lives would become exhausted by their
effects having been duly experienced,—(b) fresh sinful acts would not.
he done intentionally,—(c) those that might he done unintentionally
would he expiated by the force of repeated ‘Breath-Suppression’ and
other practices,—and (d) thus the man would be enabled to obtain the
direct perception of the real nature of the Self.

It is for this reason that even one who is bent upon seeking Brahman
should perform all such acts as ‘Study of the Veda’ and the like. As for
the acts whose renunciation has been prescribed, the subject, has been
dealt, with under Discourse VI.

The term ‘*Kriyāvidhi*,’ ‘*performance*,’ may be taken as standing for
the *act of devoted attention*, prescribed by such passages as—‘He
should be heard, meditated upon, etc., etc.;’ and since there are many
methods of such devoted attention, the text has rightly added the
phrase—‘*each in its turn*.’ For instance, in such passages as—‘one
should worship Brahman,’ ‘the Golden Person in the Sun,’ ‘this is the
Self, free from sin,’ and so forth—the object of *devoted attention* is
sometimes spoken of in some form attributed to It by our own mind;
sometimes in the form of a ‘Golden Person,’ where the expression is used
figuratively; sometimes again as the ‘lord’ of all forms of worships the
sinless Self:—*e.g*., such passages as ‘Below Him, above Him,’ etc. It
is on account of these diverse declarations that we have the repeated
phrase ‘*tasmin, tasmin*.’—(87)
