+++
title = "091 एकम् एव"

+++
This verse proceeds to point out in what manner the said result is to be
brought about.

The term ‘*bhūta*,’ ‘*being*,’ stands here for all things, movable and
immovable, animate and inanimate;—in these one should perceive the
‘self,’—cultivating the notion ‘I am this whole world’—as expressed in
the text ‘*aham vṛkṣasya, etc*.’ (Taittirīya Āraṇyaka, 7.10.1); and he
should give up all such notions of duality as ‘this is myself and that
is some one else.’ When the man comes to entertain such notions as—‘this
is myself, this is mine, that is not mine’—this is what constitutes his
‘bondage.’ When, on the other hand, he has given up all notions of ‘I’
and ‘mine,’ or ‘this is mine’ and ‘that is another’s,’ and so forth, he
comes to recognise the absolute unity of the Self.

This is what is meant by the term ‘*self-sovereignty*.’

‘*All beings in the Self*’—cultivating the notion—‘The entire phenomenal
world subsists in me,—I alone am the creator, the doer, the meditator
and the meditated upon.’

‘*Sacrifices to the Self*’—offers sacrifices to—thinks of—the Self as
representing all the gods; cultivating the notion—‘There are no such
deities as Agni or Āditya,—I am the sole deity’;—the man becomes one who
‘*sacrifices to the Self*’; and this does not mean that the man should
actually offer sacrificial materials to himself.

In this connection some people hold that it is not right to speak of
Agni and other deities of the Āgneya and other sacrifices as the ‘Self.’

‘*Svārājyam*,’ ‘*self-sovereingty*.’—The term is derived as ‘*Sve rājye
bhavam*’; and the meaning is that the man becomes as self-sufficient as
the supreme Self, and also self-luminous, not depending upon the Sun or
the Moon or other sources of light, or upon the eyes and the other
sense-organs, nor the Internal Organ of the Mind and the rest. This is
why the text uses the term ‘*paśyan*,’ ‘*perceiving*’ which implies not
merely *seeing*, but that one should contemplate upon the said idea,
giving up all functionings of the exernal and internal organs.—(91)


