+++
title = "094 तं हि"

+++
It is as if it were the ‘*Eye*’—being the means of perception; just as
the eye provides the perception of colour, so does the Veda of *dharma*;
hence it is spoken of as the ‘Eye.’

‘*Eternal*’—everlasting. This is meant to indicate the fact that the
Veda is not the work of a personal author. If it were the work of such
an author, then it would be affected by his weaknesses, and would
therefore not be entirely trustworthy. Hence, inasmuch as we find the
Veda free from all those excellences and defects that beset man, we
conclude that it is not the work of any person, and on that account, is
absolutely trustworthy.

Hence it is that, the Veda being absolutely trustworthy, it cannot be
regarded as incongruous simply because of its teachings being contrary
to facts of perception.

“If the Veda were to contain such teachings as ‘one should irrigate with
fire’ or ‘burn with water,’ would this also not be incongruous?”

The analogy is not quite correct. In the sentences cited, visible
objects with visible powers are spoken as accomplishing visible effects;
and as such objects are amenable to other means of knowledge, it is only
natural that, if there is any teaching contrary to these, it should be
regarded as incongruous. In the case in question on the other hand,
(*i.e*., of Duty) the subject, dealt with is such as is amenable to
Injunctions only, a subject upon which no other means of knowledge can
have any hearing at all,—bearing as they do only upon existing objects,
(and not upon acts *to be done*); how then can there be any incongruity
between these?

Then again, what is laid down here is that entities that are *not self*
should be looked upon as the ‘Self,’ for the purpose of attaining
‘self-sovereignty’; so that wherever the notion of diversity is very
rampant, it is only right that this should be set aside by constant,
practice. For instance, love, hatred and other functions of the mind can
be controlled by the practice of meditation; when for example, an enemy
ceases to be an enemy if he is constantly looked upon as a ‘friend.’ All
this can be ascertained by our own experience. In fact, the power of
thought is so great that it can bring about the conception of
non-existing things also; *e.g*., a lover separated front his object of
love, sees her in everything. How much more possible is it then, my
friend, in a ease where what is contemplated upon is the very truth?
Thus then, how can one be justified in asserting that, what is asserted
here appears to be contrary to the diversity that is actually perceived?
In reality all things are of the nature of the ‘Self,’ and they appear
as diverse only on account, of our being in the habit of looking upon
them as diverse. It is the perceiving of this unity that is enjoined
here; in which case there would be no chance of any such notions arising
as ‘this is mine—that is not mine,’ and the like. This is what has been
thus declared—‘The two syllables *ma-ma* (mine) connote death, and the
syllables *na-ma-ma* (not mine) connote immortality.’

Thus then there is no incongruity at all (in the teaching of the Veda).

‘*For pitṛs, gods and* men.’—These are the words of the Veda itself.
Even gods and others cannot perceive Duty and allied things without the
help of the Veda; they are *beyond their power*;—and also
‘*illimitable*’—the number of Vedic rescensions being endless. Or,
‘*aprameya*’ means that no adequate conception can be formed of the Veda
and its subsidiaries.—(94)


