+++
title = "095 यस्यास्येन सदाश्नन्ति"

+++
Having declared the trustworthiness of the Veda on the ground of its not
being the work of an author, the text proceeds to point out the
untrustworthy character of those ‘Vedas’ that are the work of personal
authors.

The ‘*revealed texts*’—in the form of Injunctions brought together under
a compilation—‘*that are outside the Veda*’ contrary to the
Veda,—*e.g*., such declarations as ‘Heaven is attained by bowing to
*caityas*’ and so forth,—which are known under the name of the doctrines
of ‘*Nirgranthas*,’ ‘*Somas*,’ and the like.

‘*False theories*’—philosophical systems based upon wrong
reasonings—such as, the proving of the Veda being the work of a personal
author, the rejecting of ‘apūrva,’ ‘deities’ and such other entities.
These are what are known as ‘*false theories*.’

‘*All these are useless*,’—‘*pretya*,’ ‘even when carried to
perfection’—by the full setting forth of reasons and examples; these are
declared to be useless; on account of the fallacious character of their
reasonings.

They are like the ‘*darkness*’ of night, on the path of duty, spreading
far and wide, in the form of huge compilations.

No trustworthiness can attach to the teachings contained in the
compilations made by human authors; for the simple reason that such
authors do not possess the faculty to perceive things beyond the senses.

In fact, even if some one did possess such a faculty, people would not
believe him; because there can be no proof for the statement that ‘such
and such a person is omniscient, and he has composed such and such a
revealed text.’

If, even on being the work of a human author, the text be regarded as
trustworthy, this would involve the necessity of assuming an unseen fact
(of the man being possessed of divine powers), for a visible purpose.
For all these reasons all those reasonings should be regarded as based
upon ignorance.

Others explain the verse to mean that, ‘*pretya*,’ *after dying*,—‘the
said texts and theories are useless,’—because they become the cause of
men being born in conditions partaking of the quality of ‘*Tamas*.’

Under this explanation, the syntactical connection of the participle
‘*pretya*’ would be impossible, since it must have the same nominative
as that of the principal verb in the sentence (which is impossible), and
the only alternative would be to read, for ‘pretya,’ ‘*prete*,’ the
Locative form of the past-participle ‘*preta*.’— (95)


