+++
title = "098 उत्पत्तिर् एव"

+++
Sound and the other objects of experience, which are also the means of
pleasure, are known through the Veda. It is by the performance of Vedic
rites that the pleasure of hearing music is secured;—and if one neglects
those rites, he becomes condemned to the hearing of sounds unpleasant to
the ear;—Sound and the other qualities, and the bodily organs
apprehending these all owe their existence to the Veda. This is what is
meant by the assertion that they ‘*proceed from the Veda*’; which does
not mean that Veda is the material cause out of which these things are
made.

This same idea is further explained by the sentence—‘*their production
is due to the secondary rites*.’—The ‘*production*’—birth, of sound and
other things—‘*is due to the secondary rites*’— Rites directly conducive
to such results as Heaven and the like are called ‘primary rites,’ while
those minor ones which bring about such minor results us sound and the
rest, are ‘*secondary rites*’; to the latter category belongs, the
*Citrā* Sacrifice.

‘*Prasūterguṇadharmataḥ*’ is another reading. In this reading ‘*guṇa*’
stands for the qualities of *Sattva*, *Rajas* and *Tamas*;—‘*dharma*’
for *modification*;—‘*prasūti*’ for the *disturbance of equilibrium,
excess, extension*; and the meaning is that Veda is the cause of the
extension of the operations of the qualities of *Sattva* and the
rest;—the Veda being regarded as the cause of all this, as it is all
due: to spiritual agencies.

There are several other curious readings, which we do not note, as they
are useless.—(98)


