+++
title = "103 विदुषा ब्राह्मणेनेदम्"

+++
*Adhyetavyam-pravaktovyam’—‘can be studied and can be taught*’—the
verbal affix denotes *capability*, not *injunction* \[ *i.e*. the
meaning is that the institutes *deserve* to be studied and taught &c.\];
for actual injunctions are going to begin only from the Second Discourse
onward; and the present Discourse is purely descriptive, it contains no
injunctions. Hence, just as the assertion, ‘Rice forms the food of
Kings,’ is regarded as a mere praise of the Rice, and it is not taken us
a prohibition of its eating by people other than Kings,—in the same
manner, in the present passage the phrase ‘*not by any one else*’ is not
a prohibition (of study by others), but only a praise of the institutes;
the sense thus is as follows:—

‘The Brāhmaṇa is the highest being in the world,—these institutes are
the best of all institutes,—hence these are capable of being studied and
taught only by the said learned Brāhmaṇa,—and they cannot be either
studied or taught by any ordinary man.’ It is in view of this that the
author adds the term ‘*with great care*’; unless great care is taken,
until the self has been duly equipped with the knowledge of other
sciences,—such as Logic, Grammar and Exigetics,—these institutes cannot
be taught. Thus it is that ‘*study*’ implies ‘hearing’ (from the lips of
the Teacher) also; and the justification for this implication lies in
the fact that the ‘learning’ (spoken of by the epithet ‘*learned*’)
comes in useful only in the case of *hearing* from the teacher’s
lips,—(which presupposes intelligent following of the oral lectures); it
would not be necessary for the mere *reading of the words*. If the
present verse were taken as an injunction of ‘study,’ the said
‘learning’ could he regarded only as serving some transcendental
purpose. It would not he right to argue that—“in the injunction also
*hearing* would be implied by the *studying*”; for it is not right to
take what is *enjoined* as subserving the purposes of implications. In
the case of Declamatory passages (Arthavāda) on the other hand, there is
nothing incongruous in admitting of indirect implications on the basis
of other sources of knowledge (while a direct Injunction by its very
nature, cannot be diverted from its direct meaning, on any account
whatsoever\],

From all this it follows that all three castes are entitled to the study
of the Institutes. This we shall explain in detail later on.—(103)


