+++
title = "107 अस्मिन् धर्मो"

+++
The Author now proceeds to describe the fact that his treatise, in
regard to its subject-matter, is complete in itself, and does not stand
in need of anything else.

That which is called ‘*Dharma*,’ ‘*is expounded*,’ in this Treatise,
‘*in its entirety*,’ wholly; that is, for acquiring the knowledge of
*Dharma*, one need not have recourse to any other treatise. This is a
hyperbolic eulogium; what is meant is only that *such Dharma as is
adumbrated in the Smṛtis* has been expounded in its entirety in this
Treatise.

‘*The good and had features of actions*,’—the desirable and undesirable
results form the ‘*good and bad features of actions*’—*i.e*. of such
actions as *sacrifice* and *Brāhmāṇa-killing* (respectively).
‘*Entirety*’ refers to the details relating to (1) the form of the acts,
(2) their procedure, (3) their results, also (4) their relation to a
particular kind of Agent, and (5) their distinction into ‘compulsory’
and ‘optional’;—it is all this that is meant by the term ‘*good and bad
features'* ‘*Dharma*’ having been already mentioned in the preceding
clause, the mention again of the term ‘*action*’ (which means the same
thing) is for the purpose of filling up the verse.

‘*Of all the four castes*’;—this also is meant to indicate the complete
charactcr of the Treatise; the meaning being that ‘whoever is entitled
to the performance of *Dharma* can derive his knowledge of it from this
Treatise’.

‘*Eternal morality*’—*Dharma* or Action, based upon, indicated by,
Morality is what is called ‘*Eternal Morality*’ here; *i.e*. Right
Behaviour. This we shall examine in detail under Discourse II (verse 4).
‘*Eternal*’—*i.e*. established by long-tradition, not merely set up by
people of the present day.—(107).


