+++
title = "111 जगतश् च"

+++
The ‘Virtues’ expounded in the Treatise are here specified in detail.
With a view to attract the attention of the hearers, it has been
described in Verse 50, *et. seq*., that the results of ‘Virtue’ are
endless. But it is passible that hearers might become discouraged by the
idea that ‘Virtue’ is interminable, without end; hence with a view to
encourage them, the Author is now providing a summary of the institute,
in the shape of a list of contents:—the sense being—‘only so many are
the subjects dealt with, not too many, and they can certainly be learnt
by people who are endowed with due regard and amount of confidence the
idea is that if the path traversed is one that has been described
briefly, it is not unbearable.

‘*The coming into existence of the world*,’—*i.e*. the measure of time,
the delineation of the characteristics of principles and things, the
praise of the Brāhmaṇa, and so forth,—all these are included under the
‘*coming into existence of the world*’; this subject has been dealt with
in the Treatise as a commendatory description, and not as something to
be actually accepted as absolutely true.

‘*The rates relating to sacramental rites*,’ ‘*the method of keeping
observances*.’ By ‘sacramental rites’ are meant those connected with
‘Impregnation’ and the rest; the ‘rules’ *i.e*., procedure—relating to
these;—*the keeping of ‘observances*’—*i.e*., by the Initiated
Student,—of these the ‘*method*,’ the actual performance, the
procedure;—this sums up what has been proclaimed in Discourse
II.—‘*Final Ablution,’—i.e*. the particular ceremony performed by one
who is returning from the house of his Preceptor (after finishing his
course of study).—(111)
