+++
title = "116 वैश्य-शूद्रोपचारञ् च"

+++
The ‘*description of the means of livelihood*,’—*i.e*., of the means of
subsistence, in the form of acquiring wealth and the like.—‘*Of the
Initiated Householder*,’—*i.e*., of one who has finished his Vedic study
and has returned home from his teacher’s house; ‘*the observances*,’
such as ‘he should not look at the rising sun’ and so forth. All this
forms the subject-matter of Discourse IV.

‘*Lawful and forbidden food*,’—‘five five-nailed animals are permitted
food,’ and ‘forbidden food’—such as onion, etc.—‘*Purification*,’—by
lapse of time, as in the case of childbirth—‘*cleansing of things*,’
with water.—‘*The condition of women*’—such as childhood, youth and so
forth. All this is dealt with in Discourse V.

‘*Duties of the Recluse*’—the Recluse is one whose chief work consists
in the performing of austerity,—*i.e*., the ‘*Vānaprastha*,’ the Hermit;
and the duty of these is called ‘*Tapasyā*.’—‘*Final Release*,’—*i.e*.,
the duty of the Wandering Mendicant.—‘*Renunciation*,’ is a particular
form of the said ‘duty’ (of the Mendicant); how this is so will be
explained in the chapter referred to. All this forms the subject matter
of Discourse VI.

‘*The entire duty*,’—those leading to visible (physical) as well as
invisible (super-physical) results,—‘*of the king*,’—*i.e*., of the man
whose business it is to protect the Earth, and who has obtained
sovereignty. This forms the subject-matter of Discourse VII.

‘*Of law-suits*,’—such as the non-payment of debts,
etc.;—‘*decision*,’—*i.e*., dispelling all doubts, ascertaining the
facts and deciding upon the course of action to be adopted.—‘*The method
of examination of witnesses*,’—this has been mentioned separately
(though already included in the foregoing), because of its great
importance. This is the subject-matter of Discourse VIII.

‘*Duties of husband and wife*,’—*i.e*., behaviour towards each other,
when living together, and also when living apart.—‘*Laws relating to
division*’—*i.e*., of Property. ‘*Gambling*’—*i.e*., Laws relating to
gambling are here spoken of as ‘gambling’—‘*The extermination
of*,’—means of banishing,—‘*bad characters*’—such as thieves, robbers
and the like. Though in reality the ‘Division of Property,’ forming one
of the eighteen ‘matters of dispute,’ is included under ‘*law-suits*’
and as such, standing on the same footing as the ‘nonpayment of debts,’
need not have been mentioned separately, yet it has been mentioned
separately because it forms the subject-matter of a distinct Discourse.
*The duties of the Vaiśya and the Śūdra*,’—*i.e*., the performance of
their respective duties. All this is dealt with in Discourse IX.

‘*The birth*’ coming into existence, ‘*of the mixed Castes*,’—*i.e*., of
the ‘*Kṣattṛ*,’ the ‘*Vaideha*,’ etc., etc.—‘*Duties during times of
distress*,’—*i.e„* when failing to carry on livelihood by the means
prescribed for them, they are reduced to the point of death; and then
there are certain duties that devolve upon the various castes.—This is
dealt with in Discourse X.

‘*The method of expiation*,’—is dealt with in Discourse XI.—(113-116)
