+++
title = "001 चातुर्वर्ण्यस्य कृत्स्नो"

+++
The first half of the verse indicating the end of the subject-matter of
the ordinances, serves the purpose of shutting out any further desire on
the part of the listeners.

‘*Whole*’— This epithet is meant to be commendatory; the sense being
that ‘these ordinances have set forth all the *Smārta* duties along with
the esoteric explanations.’

The fact of the Teacher having completed his task is described through
the mouth of the pupil; but no stress is meant to be laid upon it.

In reality however the assertions set forth here do not emanate from the
Teacher and Pupil at all; the author of the book himself has divided
these into two parts (of question and answer).

The term ‘Dharma’ denoting *what ought to be done*, here stands for the
whole compilation of Injunctions and Prohibitions. And it is through
this that the connection between actions and their results, even though
not referred to before, is now set forth.

The assertion—‘*The whole law has been expounded by you*’—becomes
explicable only when taken as referring to Injunctions and Prohibitions.

“The result of what action is asked about—when it is said—‘*Instruct us
now in regard to the function of actions*’? For those actions that are
compulsory are done simply because they have been enjoined by the
Scriptures, and the agent does not have any reward in view at all; those
that are not compulsory, in connection with nearly every one of them
distinct rewards have been spoken of;—*e.g*., in such declarations as
‘one who makes a gift of water obtains satisfaction, as also heaven and
longevity’;—and even those in connection with which it might be thought
that no rewards have been spoken of,—there also it has been proved that
Heaven is their reward;—as regards the Gestatory and other Sacramental
Rites, these have their reward in the peculiar character that they
bestow upon the persons for whom they are performed; and as such do not
stand in need of any transcendental results;—the Occasional Acts, such
as the purifying of substances and the like, or the bathing on touching
a Caṇḍāla and so forth,—these also lead to results that are quite
perceptible; they are done for the purpose of purifying things, because
the use of impure things has been forbidden;—lastly, as regards
Expiatory Rites the purpose served by them has been just described. Thus
we fail to see those actions whose results are -sought to be known.”

The result sought to be known is that of those that are forbidden; as it
is those that are spoken of below, as ‘the sinfulness of acts committed
through the body, etc., etc.’ (Verse 9). And in a way the obeying of
prohibitions also is something enjoined by the scriptures.

“If those acts also were laid down for the purpose of rewards, they
would not be incumbent on all men; as they would be performed by only
such men as happen to have a desire for the particular reward.”

Our answer to this is as follows:—Here no such results are going to be
described as are *desired* by men; as what are set forth here are the
*undesirable* results; and certainly these are not *desired*; no man
ever wishes to obtain what is undesirable; and it is in this manner that
the results mentioned come to bear upon all men.

What we have said regarding the obeying of prohibitions being an act
done in accordance with scriptural injunctions, does not go far enough;
the fact of the matter is that everything is done in accordance with
scriptural injunctions.

“But the acts that the scriptural injunctions set forth are done for the
sake of men desiring the results of those acts;—or in some cases, the
acts are occasional ones, laid down without reference to any results in
the case in question (of prohibitions) however, inasmuch as we do not
find any expressions indicative of the fact that they shall he obeyed
‘throughout life,’ wherefore would the forbidden act not he done?”

It is found that if one ignores the prohibitions he incurs sin. For
instance, it has been declared that ‘by entertaining a desire to kill a
Brāhmaṇa, one goes to hell.’

“The act that is forbidden,—such as the killing of a Brāhmaṇa and the
like,—is certainly not one that is enjoined by the scripture. It is only
an act enjoined by the scripture that can have any connection with
results mentioned in the scriptures; as we find in the case of such
declarations as—‘one desiring heaven should perform sacrifices’; where
the fact that *sacrifices should be performed* is one that can he got at
only from the scriptures, and not from any other source. In the ease in
question on the other hand, men are prompted to do the prohibited acts
by *hatred* and such other worldly unscriptural motives; and what is
itself *unscriptural* cannot have any connection with a result that is
*scriptural*. It has been asserted that texts have indicated that the
ignoring of prohibitions is conducive to sin. But what would be the need
for such an indication?

Since all that we learn from the scriptural prohibition is that it says
to the man moved by hatred to do some forbidden act (like the killing,
for instance)—‘this should not be done’; and there the comprehension of
the sentence is complete; what word is left there uncomprehended which
would need the said indication?”

If we were to pursue this enquiry further, it would prolong our work
unduly. The fact of the matter in brief is this:—what the prohibitive
injunction ‘one shall not kill’ signifies is a *prohibition*. Now there
does arise in the mind of the person to whom this injunction is
addressed a desire to know what it all means; and the idea that he
derives from it is—‘such and such a course of action shall not be
adopted by me’; and it is not the object (act) that is urged by the
Injunction; since by their very nature injunctions are meant to urge
agents, and the agent in the case in question would be indicated by the
presence of the worldly motive of *hatred*, which is what would be in
keeping with the nature of the act of *killing*. The man who undertakes
to kill by his own will would not stand in need of being urged by an
injunction; and it is such a person to whom the prohibitive injunction
is addressed. In a case where the action is indicated by other sources,
any injunction that bears upon it may be taken as indicating the agent
concerned; and in cases where no desire for any result is concerned, the
person who is urged by the injunction does not comprehend the fact of
bis being the person urged, until he understands that what is prohibited
leads to an undesirable result: In fact such is the way in which
ordinary men understand things. When a certain act is found to be
forbidden by the Veda, if a man does it, it is understood that it would
lead to undesirable results. And in matters like the present nothing can
be put forward except what happens in the course of ordinary worldly
experience. And even if the fact of a certain act leading to undesirable
results, is not directly mentioned, it will be only right to assume this
fact, on the basis of the very nature of prohibitions; to say nothing of
cases where the said fact is directly mentioned? For there can be no
justification of rejecting what, is directly mentioned. The mention of
such results as ‘hell’ and the like cannot be regarded as purely
declamatory, so long as it is capable of being taken as setting forth
the results of acts spoken of. Further, declamatory assertions also are
only complements to injunction. In the case in question, however, there
is no injunction mentioned either directly or indirectly; because the
fact principally sought to be set forth is the connection between the
act and the result. In the present discourse no acts are enjoined; all
that is propounded is the relation of certain acts to certain results;
and the hundreds of assertions contained here cannot be meaningless. If
they were really meaningless, we would have admitted it to be so; but
such is not the way of writers on *Smṛtis*. Nor can the passages in
question be explained in any other way save in the one indicated above;
specially as there is no injunction to which they could be complements
(and hence be taken as Declamatory Declarations).

It might be argued that such figurative explanation would be wrong, even
on the part of writers on scriptures.

But it is not so; those who talk thus show utter disregard for the Great
Sages.

‘*Agha*’ is *sin*; ‘*anagha*,’ ‘*sinless one*,’ is in the Case of
Address; denoting freedom from sin, which is meant to be a praise of the
teacher.

‘*Instruct*’ denotes *speaking*.—(l)


