+++
title = "004 तस्येह त्रिविधस्याऽपि"

+++
*Objection*—“All actions, good or bad, laid down in such passages as—‘he
shall punish the guilty,’ ‘he shall not injure,’ are accomplished by the
operation of the *body*. For instance, (*a*) the act of *giving*, which
consists in the withdrawing of one’s ownership over a thing and bringing
about that of another, is laid down as ‘to be done with the right hand’
and so forth (which involves a bodily action); (*b*) the act of
*sacrificing*, consisting of the entire procedure ending with the Final
Bath, is one that is accomplished by bodily operations; (*c*) similarly
all such acts as desisting from striking others with a stick and so
forth are such as are due to bodily operations. What then is that action
which springs from the *Mind*?”

It is in answer to this that the text says—‘*Know the Mind to be the
instigator of all this*.’—Seeing and all such acts are functions of the
Mind; as in the absence of Mind, no purely physical action is possible
For instance, in the case of every act, the agent first of all conceives
of the thing concerned as being of a certain nature and as bringing
about pleasure or pain, or leading to something on which pleasure or
pain is dependent, and then comes to the determination ‘I shall have
this’ or ‘I shall not have it’; and it is only the action to which this
determination leads where the functioning of the body or of speech comes
in. Thus it is that in the case of ail intentional actions, the Mind is
the ‘*instigator*.’ As for unintentional actions, the said process is
not always perceptible; for instance, when wine is drunk under the
misapprehension that it is some, other drink, or when one approaches
another woman, mistaking her for one’s own wife, or in cases of such
chance-actions as the killing of mosquitoes and other insects by the
throwing about of the hand, turning on one’s sides during sleep and so
forth; though in all these cases also the responsibility for doing it
rests on the agent, which renders him liable to expiation.

‘*Which is* *of* *three kinds*’;—as brought about by speech, mind and
body.

‘*Three substrata*’;—in accordance with the ‘high,’ ‘low’ and ‘middling’
conditions of the agent.

‘*Endowed with ten distinct characteristics*’;—the functions of the mind
and the body being of three kinds each \[making up six\] and those of
speech are of four kinds,—thus making up the ‘*ten*.’ These are going to
be described in the next few verses.—(4)


