+++
title = "005 परद्रव्येष्व् अभिध्यानम्"

+++
‘*Coveting*’—What is meant is that through jealousy for the wealth of
other men, one may be constantly thinking of some adversity befalling
their fortune—‘Oh, how many horses and cows! How many sheep and goats!
What excellent horses! Woe to men! How is it that he has attained such
prosperity! In what way may I wrest it all from him! It would be grand
if all this wealth of his were destroyed!’

‘*Scheming about what is undesirable*.’— Some people construe this also
with the phrase ‘of others’; and take it to mean ‘the planning of the
death of others with the view that all his wealth will come to him.’

“The ‘*coveting of the wealth of others*’ has also been explained to
mean this same thing; so that the idea having been already provided by
this phrase, the former would be entirely superfluous.”

The second phrase is a wider term. It is not right to ‘scheme about’
*what is undesirable*, for others; and *loss of wealth* is a particular
form of ‘what is undesirable.’

It is in view of this difficulty that some people do not construe this
second phrase with the phrase ‘*of others*’; and they explain
‘*undesirable*’ as standing for *forbidden*.

According to this view also, ‘the coveting of the wealth of others’
(which is also *forbidden*) would have to be taken as mentioned
separately, only for the purpose of indicating its importance.

Similarly with the phrase ‘*adhering to a wrong notion*’; *e.g*., (*a*)
when the *prima facie* argument is regarded as the Final Conclusion,
(*b*) the philosophy of Idealism, (*c*) the view that the Veda is not
trustworthy, (d) insistence on the view that there is no such thing as
the *Soul*, and so forth.

Others explain this to mean constant opposition to the renouncing of
meat-eating.

These three constitute the *evil* type of ‘mental activity’; apart from
these are those of the *good* type; *e.g*., ‘not coveting what belongs
to another,’ ‘kindness to all creatures,’ ‘faith in the reality of
morality and such things.’ Says the revered Vyāsa—‘Non-coveting of the
property of others, sympathy for all beings, and the idea that righteous
deeds always bring their reward,—one should constantly think in his mind
of these three items.’—(5)


