+++
title = "013 जीवसञ्ज्ञो ऽन्तरात्मान्यः"

+++
“What is this that is called ‘*Jīva*’ or ‘Soul?’ People regard the
‘Conscious Being’ (Kṣetrajña) as the ‘Jīva.’ Only two beings are
generally recognised—the Body and the Inner Soul known as the ‘I’ the
‘*Jīva*’ spoken of here is apparently different from these two.”

Some people explain that what is called ‘*Jīva*,’ ‘Soul,’ here, is the
Subtle Body made up of the ‘Great Principle’ (*Mahat* of the Sāṅkhyas)
and the rudimentary elements, which has been described as the Subtle
Body, ‘migrating, without experiencing, and invested with impressions’
(*Sāṅkhya-kārikā*). The term ‘*yena*,’ ‘*through which*,’ speaks of this
as if it were the ‘instrument’ of the act of experiencing; and this can
apply only to the said Subtle Body; as it serves as the substratum of
the grosser material substances, being as it is, the substratum of the
material body itself. It is only when the Body is there that the Self
can feel pleasure and pain; and this is what is expressed by the
instrumental ending in ‘*yena*,’ ‘through which.’

Others however think that it is the ‘Internal Organ,’ consisting of
*Intelligence*, (*Buddhi*), *Mind* (*Manas*) and *I-notion*
(*Ahaṅkāra*), that is spoken of here as ‘*Jīva*.’ And since this is an
‘Internal *organ*,’ it is only right that it should be spoken of by
means of the Instrumental ending.

That this should be called the ‘*inner self*’ is also quite right, since
it subserves the purposes of the Self.

‘*Generated along with*.’—This means that it remains attached to the
Self till Final Liberation, and is never separated from him till Final
Dissolution.—(13)


