+++
title = "019 तौ धर्मम्"

+++
“If the ‘*two*’ be meant to be the ‘Great Principle’ and the ‘Conscious
Being,’ then, for whom does the term ‘*his*’ stand?”

Some people hold that this latter term stands for the ‘Soul’ (*Jīva*).

But it has already been said that the ‘Soul’ is the same as the
‘Conscious Being.’

Another view is that ‘*his*’ stands for the *Subtle Body*. But this also
is the same as the ‘Great Principle.’

The third view is that it stands for the *Internal Organ*, consisting of
the ‘Intelligence’ (*Buddhi*) and the rest.

But in this case, it will have to be explained what connection there is
between this Internal Organ and ‘Merit—Demerit.’ For the said organ is
nothing more than a subtle form of Matter; as was made clear under 1.19.

For all these reasons what we think is that the right explanation is to
take the term ‘*two*’ as standing for the ‘Great Principle’ and the
‘Supreme Self,’ in accordance with the explanation provided by some
people of the term ‘two’ (in Verse 18); as it is only for these two that
the act of ‘looking into’ is possible;—the ‘Great Principle,’ which is
really an *instrument* (of perception) being figuratively spoken of as
the *nominative agent*; just as in the case of such expressions as
‘Fuels are cooking.’ And the term ‘*his*’ would, in this case, refer to
the ‘Conscious Being,’ as apart from the ‘Great Principle’ and the
‘Supreme Self.’

And when the ‘Supreme Self’ is spoken of as ‘looking into’ the ‘*merit
and demerit*’ belonging to the ‘Conscious Being,’ what is meant is that
all experiencing of pleasure and pain is under the control of that
Supreme Being. This is what has been asserted in the following
passage:—‘Impelled by the Supreme Lord one may go either to Heaven or to
the bottomless pit’;—where ‘impelling’ can stand only for ‘wish as
regulated by the merit and demerit of the man.’

“But if the man’s merit and demerit were to regulate the wish of God,
then this would deprive God of his very character of the Supreme Lord.”

This has been explained in the *Śārīraka* that the ease of God a warding
happiness and unhappiness in accordance with the merit and demerit of
the man stands on the same footing as the King bestowing his rewards in
accordance with the nature of the services rendered by each man,—which
fact does not deprive him of his kingly power. This is what is meant by
the ‘Great Principle’ and the ‘Supreme Self’ ‘looking into’ the merit
and demerit—of the ‘Conscious Being.’

“This cannot be right; as it would be inconsistent with what
follows—‘*invested with which he obtains, etc*.’ Because no one is ever
spoken of as ‘invested’—connected—with the Supreme Self. In fact, there
can be no sort of connection with the Supreme Self.”

It is for this reason that the phrase ‘*with which both*’ of the text
should he taken as referring, not to the ‘Great Principle’ and the
Supreme Self, but to Merit and Demerit; and these latter also form the
subject-matter of the context (and as such can be referred to by the
pronoun in question) as is clear from the sentence—‘*they look into his
merit and demerit*.’

If the term ‘Great Principle,’ (‘*mahat*’), be taken as standing for the
Internal Organ, then there would certainly be an incongruity, as the
Supreme Self does not stand in need of an *Instrument* for his
perceptions.

“Under Verse 18, however, the Supreme Self, which is of the nature of
true Consciousness, has been spoken of as being *approached*;—now what
sort *o* *f approaching* would this be? If it meant *becoming one with
him*, then this could not be brought about merely by the destruction of
sins. If, on the other hand, it meant *capability of reaching him*, then
this could not be possible for one who has become deprived of his body
by the dissolution of the constituent material particles.”

It is for this reason that in the sentence ‘*the two look into his merit
and demerit*,’ the term ‘*his*’ must be taken, as shown above, as
standing for the Self (personal).—(19)


