+++
title = "050 ब्रह्मा विश्वसृजो"

+++
‘*Creators of the universe*’—Marīci and others, known as ‘Prajāpatis.’

‘*Dharma*’—What is expounded in the Veda; the former verse had spoken of
the Veda itself, and the present one speaks of what is contained in the
Veda; this shows that the *meaning* is more important than *the form* of
the word. Or ‘Dharma’ may stand for *Truth* and other such things.

The corporeality of ‘Dharma’ is to be explained as before (in the case
of the Veda).

‘*The Great One*’ is another name for the ‘*Unmanifest*,’ which is
synonymous with ‘*Prakṛti*,’ ‘*Pradhāna*,’ ‘the Root-Evolvent.’

“The entire world being an emanation from the Root-Evolvent, when there
happens to be an excess in it of the quality of *Sattva*, all such
emanations should partake of that quality. How then can there be any
excess of *Rajas* and *Tamas* in anything? So that what has been said
under Verse 25 above, to the effect that—‘the body in which one of these
preponderates,’ etc.—cannot be right”

The answer to this is as follows:—It does not mean that ‘the emanations
partake of the nature of the Root-Evolvent’; what is meant is that there
are three ways of explaining the term ‘*avyakta*,’ ‘unmanifest’:—(1) It
may mean that the Root-Evolvent is something *unattainable*, or (2) that
it is *invisible*; or (3) that the term may not stand for that
Root-Evolvent which is a principle postulated by the *Sāṅkhyas*; the
term ‘unmanifest’ connoting a certain *act*,—viz., that ‘there is no
manifestation’ of the entity concerned, ‘its appearance is indistinct,’
and hence it is ‘*unmanifest*’; and in this sense the name becomes
applicable to the Supreme Self, and the epithet ‘*great*’ is applicable
to It on the ground of its immanence.

“But the state of the Supreme Self cannot partake of the quality of
*Sattva*.”

As a matter of fact, even without entirely renouncing the ‘qualities’
one can be regarded as ‘Supreme Self’; for it is understood that when
the man has the feeling ‘I am not,’ ‘there is nothing that is *mine*,’
and becomes free from the notion of ‘I,’ he attains the position of
‘Brahman’ (the Supreme Self). In fact, it is by meditation that the
position of ‘Brahman’ is attained. But only those persons have recourse
to meditation and such practices in whom the preponderating quality is
*Sattva*, not *Rajas* or *Tamas*.

It is in this sense that this is described as “*the best state partaking
of* ‘*Sattva*.’”

The other two explanations (of the term ‘unmanifest’) are not right. As
regards (a), no human end is served by *attaining* the position of the
Root-Evolvent; because this has been described as ‘insentient,’ and what
is ‘insentient’ is inferior to even *immovable beings*; it is for this
reason that people never seek for such condition as that during
intoxication or swoon. As regards the *seeing* of the Root-Evolvent,
this cannot be possible, as no such *seeing* has been anywhere
mentioned; as what is prescribed is that ‘the Self should be
seen,’—*not* the Root-Evolvent.

From all this it is clear that the terms ‘*the Great One*’ and
‘*Unmanifest*’ stand, for the *Supreme Self*.—(50)


