+++
title = "085 सर्वेषाम् अपि"

+++
**(verses 12.84-85)**

The ‘Knowledge of Self’ is of two kinds—(1) the Knowledge of the *Self*,
as something distinct from the body, the sense-organs and other
things,—as the *doer* of acts and the *experiencer* of results, as the
object of the notion of ‘I’ which forms part of the conception of the
Self, as bearing the names of ‘*Soul*,’ ‘Conscious Being,’ and so forth,
as enjoying, even after the death of the body, the fruits of actions
that have not been spent up; and (2) the Knowledge of the Self as the
one Supreme Entity ensouling all entities, including men and
animals,—the one eternal cause of the birth, existence and dissolution
of the entire universe which assumes diverse forms through the
encrustations of Illusion,—whose exact nature is indicated by such
*Śruti* texts as—‘The Self is to be seen, to be listened to, to be
meditated upon,’ and so forth.

Now of these two, the Knowledge of the Soul comes useful în the
performance of acts. If there were no such entity, distinct from the
body and other things, the experiencer of effects appearing after
death,—then all injunctions relating to Heaven as the desired result and
such others would be meaningless; and no one would undertake these acts;
hence the said knowledge is of use in this.

As for the knowledge of the one Supreme Self, which is attained by
long-continued meditation and service, it would be useful in the
attaining of the realisation of the Self in its pristine nature, pure,
enlightened, free, blissful, eternal and imperishable.

‘*It is the bent of all Sciences, as Immortality is attained by its
means*.’

‘*Immortality*’ stands for the cessation of transmigration.—‘*By its
means*’—‘its’ referring to ‘Science,’ stands for the ‘Science’ or
Knowledge of the *Supreme Self*; its the Knowledge of the individual
Soul, being useful in the performance of acts, could not bring about
Immortality; hence it must stand for the realisation of the True Self,
including all that is dual and nondual, which has been taught in the
Vedānta texts.—(84-85)


