+++
title = "090 प्रवृत्तङ् कर्म"

+++
\(A\) “It has been said that the ‘active’ act is that which brings about
desirable rewards; and among actions leading to desirable rewards, some
securing for the agent Heaven or some such results, while some bring
about only visible results. There is none that is known to bring any
such desirable result as ‘*equality to the gods*.’ Why then should it be
said that the man ‘*attains equality to the gods*’? Those actions also
in connection with which no particular rewards are mentioned,—such for
instance, as the *Viśvajit* and other sacrifices,—have been held to have
their reward in the attaining of Heaven. Thus we do not know what those
acts are of which the reward consists in attaining ‘equality to the
gods.’—It will not be right to argue in this connection that—‘Those
actions that have been laid down as bringing a particular reward, when
done by men who have no desire for that reward, bring about the said
*equality to the gods*.’—as this would involve the rejecting of what is
directly asserted and thus assuming of that which is nowhere asserted.
In fact what is spoken of in the Veda as the ‘reward’ of actions is
something that is *desired*, such as village, Heaven and so forth, and
not the *taking of poison* and such things. Under the circumstances, to
say that ‘equality to gods’ is attained (as the result of acts) and yet
it is not ‘desired,’ would be a contradiction in terms.—‘How is it then
that under Prohibitions, such results are mentioned as *not
desired*?’—It is in the very nature of the prohibited act that its
results should be *undesirable*; what is *evil* cannot be *desired*
\[and the result of the prohibited act can only be evil\]. If it be held
that ‘equality to gods’ is the result of the compulsory acts, then that
would deprive these acts of their ‘compulsory’ character;—a character
that has been understood to belong to them on the basis of the
declaration that they are to be performed ‘as long as one is alive.’ If
it be absolutely necessary to assume some reward in the case of these
acts also, we may assume it to consist in ‘escaping from sin;’ as such a
reward, if assumed, would not be inconsistent with the *compulsory*
character of the acts.”

\(B\) “As regards the latter part of the verse—‘*passes beyond the five
material substances*’— we do not understand how ‘*atyeti*’ can mean
‘passes *beyond*’ or ‘becomes freed from.’ As a matter of fact,
‘*atyaya*’ is used in the sense of ‘*laya*,’ ‘becoming resolved into’;
and certainly it is not meant that the soul ever becomes ‘resolved into’
the material substances; what is meant is that ‘it becomes one with
Brahman.’ Others also have explained the passage to mean that ‘the man
goes beyond (*atikrāmati*) the five material substances,’—*i.e*., ‘his
body is no longer made up of the five substances, it becomes purely
luminous.’ But this also is nothing; as ‘Liberation’ means *not being
fettered with a body*; so that whether the body is take to be
constituted of five substances, or of only one (Light), it is all the
same so far as the metempsychic bondage of the Soul is concerned.”

“For these reasons some other explanation, has to be found for this
verse.”

The answer to the above is as follows:—

\(A\) The question has been asked—“What action is that of which
*equality to gods* is the reward? The compulsory acts have no reward,
while those that are done for the purpose of obtaining a reward, have
distinct rewards mentioned along with them.” Our answer to this is, that
the reward spoken of in the text is not one that is held to follow from
*all Vedic Acts*; what is meant is that if a man does an act of the
‘passive’ kind, but with a distinct desire for its result (in the shape
of *Liberation*), and somehow fails to attain it, then the reward that
he obtains is *equality to the. gods*. The purport of it all is that, of
all that is laid down in the Ritualistic Section of the Veda, the
culminating point of the reward is *the attainment of equality to the
gods*, and not *Liberation*. As for the acts prescribed in the Esoteric
Section of the Veda, which leads to the result that the man never again
returns to metempsychic existence,—if the Agent happens to be desirous
of obtaining a reward, he becomes tainted by that hankering, and that
act of his turns out, on account of that taint, to be a cause of
bondage. It is in the very nature of *actions* that they prompt the
Agent, to undertake them for the purpose of bringing to him a definite
reward. Thus the compulsory acts also, if left undone, become sources of
sin; and as such these also tend to invest the Agent with a material
body (for the experiencing of the fruits of that omission).—“If one
performs the compulsory acts, and does not perform those that are
conducive to rewards, or those that are forbidden, there being no acts
that would bring about a material body for him, the man would naturally
attain Liberation;—where then would there be any use for the ‘knowledge
of self’? This is what has been declared in such passages as—‘With a
view to avoid sin, one should perforin the compulsory and occasional
acts; it is only when one is unfit for Liberation that he undertakes
such as are either forbidden or conducive to desirable results.’”—This
has been explained already: Knowledge is necessary for the destruction
of Ignorance; until Ignorance has been destroyed by Knowledge,—it is not
possible for one to become one with Brahman. It is with a view to this
that action done without desires has been spoken of as ‘done with
knowledge’ (Verse 89);—and also ‘selfishness is not commended’
(2.2).—When two persons act similarly, they gain equal prosperity; this
is what is meant by the ‘*equality*’ (of gods);—the meaning being that
he attains the same condition as that of the gods.

\(B\) As regards the objections against the declaration that the man
‘*passes beyond the five material substances*,’ and the confusion that
is made regarding its real signification,—that also is not right.
Because ‘*atyaya*’ may mean *disappearance* also; so that what the text
means is that the whole phenomenal world, consisting of material
substances, *disappears* for the man.

If we read ‘*abhyeti*’ for ‘*atyeti*,’ it would mean that the man
becomes freed form the shackles of the body.—(90)


