+++
title = "105 प्रत्यक्षञ् चाऽनुमानम्"

+++
In a friendly spirit, the author adds a teaching bearing upon the
ordinary business of the world.

‘*Dharma*’—is what is taught in the Veda.

‘*Śuddhi*’—correct knowledge, consisting of the rejection of the *prima
facie* view of things and the acceptance of the correct conclusion, is
obtained only when one has formed correct notions regarding Perception
and the other means of knowledge. For instance, it is only when one has
a correct conception of the perception of things that he is cognizant of
the fact that *flame* is something fleeting, and when he finds that the
case with sound is not so, he grasps the truth that ‘sound is eternal.’
If, on the other hand, the man has no correct conception of things
perceived, he will entertain the same notion regarding the perception of
both sound and flame. So that perceiving that flame is fleeting, he
would conclude that sound also is fleeting; and for this man the Veda
would only be ‘an aggregate of fleeting sounds’...(?)

Similarly ‘*Inference*’ should be duly learnt. If a man does not become
acquainted with the right process of Inference, he would be liable to
draw inferences from the Minor Term only, or only from that which does
not contain the major term, and thus infer the existence of an author
for the Veda also. When on the other hand, he understands the nature of
Inference, he concludes that the Veda is not the work of an author, from
the premiss that no work of the nature of the Veda is ever found to be
the work of an author.

‘*Scriptures o* *f* *various traditions*.’—The Scriptures contain many
Injunctions and Prohibitions; and hence there are several ‘*traditions*’
regarding them. ‘*Āgama*’ literally means ‘*āgamyate*,’ ‘that which
comes down to one.’ There being several rescissions of the Veda, it is
spoken of as having ‘several *traditions*,’ specially with reference to
the distinction drawn between ‘*Śruti*’ and ‘*Smṛti*.’

This fact, already implied by the Injunction of ‘Vedic Study,’ has been
recalled here by the Author, in a friendly spirit. All this may be
regarded as mere *praise*.—(105)


