+++
title = "106 आर्षन् धर्मोपदेशम्"

+++
‘*Ārṣa*’ means ‘pertaining to a *Ṛṣi*,’ and the term ‘*ṛṣi*’ here means
the *Veda*; hence ‘*Ārṣa Upadeśa*’ means ‘Vedic teaching.’

This, if a man ‘*explores*’—tries to find out—‘*by ratiocination*’—by
means of inferences,—‘*he understands Dharma*’—such is the verbal
construction of the passage.

‘*Ratiocination*’—is the process of reasoning where a certain
proposition is set up, and rejected, if found to be wrong on
examination; the man coming to such conclusions as—‘It is right to
accept this, and reject that.’ For instance, the sacred text used at the
*Āgneya* sacrifice is—‘Devasya tvā savituḥ...agnaye tvā juṣṭam
*nirvapāmi*’ (Vājasaneya Saṃhitā, 2.11); now an ectype of this *Āgneya*
is the ‘*Saurya*’ Sacrifice of which the deity is *Sūrya*;—and in
accordance with the general law that ‘the ectype shall be performed in
the same manner as its archetype,’ it would follow that the sacred text
just quoted shall be used at the *Saurya* sacrifice also;—but here one
argues that though ‘*agnaye tvā*’ would be the right form for the
*Āgneya*, where the deity is *Agni*, it could not be right for the
*Saurya*, where the deity is *Sūrya*; hence while at this latter, the
rest of the text shall be used in the same form, the words ‘*agnaye
tvā*’ should be altered into ‘*sūryāya tvā*.’ Such a reasoning would not
be inconsistent with the Veda.

Some people may argue thus: “At the *Saurya* sacrifice, Agni is not the
deity; and it is in accordance with their meanings that sacred texts are
employed at sacrifices; so that when one part of the said text is not
applicable to the *Saurya* sacrifice, if that portion were dropped, it
would cease to be a *Sacred text*;—hence the whole text should be
dropped.”

But such reasoning would be contrary to the teaching of the Veda.

Similarly if one were to argue that—‘Since the sacred text has to be
used, it must be always used in its original unaltered form only,’—this
also would be contrary to the Veda.

In fact, what is set forth here is not an Injunction, but a commendatory
statement; and the purport of it is that what should be done in such
cases is to be ascertained by the process of reasonings embodied in the
Mīmāṃsā;—hence it is the study of *Mīmāṃsā* that is indirectly enjoined
for the purpose of obtaining a correct knowledge of *Dharma*.

Others explain the text in the following manner:—

‘*Tarka*,’ ‘Ratiocination,’ stands for works of which reasoning forms
the main subject; which make it their business to set forth the ordinary
means of cognition,—*i.e*., works on Nyāya, on Vaiśeṣika and on the
materialistic Systems of Philosophy. From among these however, those
belonging to the last category,—*i.e*., works written by Bauddhas,
Nirgranthas and others—which are inconsistent with the Veda—are
rejected; since for these writers the Veda is not an authoritative
source of knowledge; as it is for Kapila, Kaṇāda (and the Naiyāyika).
This is shown by the following Sūtra of Gautama—‘Perception, Inference,
Analogy and *Word* are the pramāṇas’ (1.1.3); and the *Vaiśeṣikas*
also—‘the authoritative character of the Veda is due to its being His
declaration’ (Vaiśeṣika Sūtra). Hence these latter should be carefully
listened to (and learnt). In the *Mahābhārata* also, the revered Kṛṣṇa
Dvaipāyana has declared—‘O king, your intellect seems to be bewildered
by the words of the text, just like that of the foolish Vedic scholar,
and hence it fails to grasp the subtle aspects of things’;—where the
mention of ‘bewilderment caused by the words of the text’ implies the
propriety of applying reasonings. There is yet another statement—‘One
who follows the *Smṛtis* should never attend to materialistic Brāhmaṇas,
since these are adepts in evil and proud of their learning.’ This
forbids listening to unsound reasonings; while the former text (from the
*Mahābhārata*) lays down the propriety of attending to sound reasonings.

The authoritative character of the Veda some people would seek to prove
by the fact of its being the work of God. But this is not possible; as
according to this view the Veda cannot he authoritative, as its whole
fabric would rest upon the will of God, and when we find contradictory
statements, we are prone to take the opposite view that the Veda is not
trustworthy.

For this reason the reasonings set forth by these persons would also
have to be rejected as ‘unsound’; specially as these do not help in any
way towards the understanding of the meaning of Vedic texts. Says the
*Sāṅkhya*, for instance (in regard to the Veda)—‘it is beset with
impurity, destruction and excess’ (*Kārikā*, 2). The followers of
Gautama also have put forward certain arguments, which embody the *prima
facie* position against the Ritualistic Section of the Veda (Nyāya
Sūtra, 2.1.5, *et. seq*.);—though these arguments are represented as
proceeding from another party.

It is only in the *Pūrva-Mīmāṃsā* and the *Vedānta* that we find the
authority of the Veda unequivocally stated, in the form in which it is
set forth in such Vedic texts as—‘The gods came down from the heavenly
regions to this world,—the sages followed them,—and the men said to
them—*How are we going to live*?—To them the sages revealed all their
duties,—hence the reasonings that the good Brāhmaṇas propound are
*Vedic*.’ This is a passage that explains the exact nature of what is
meant by ‘*ratiocination*’ in the present context.—(106)


