+++
title = "108 अनाम्नातेषु धर्मेषु"

+++
“How can there be any doubt on points not dealt with by the Ordinances?
For the matter would be wholly unknown.”

The answer to this is that what is meant is not what is not spoken of at
all, but that in regard to which the law has been stated only in a
general form, and the particular applications of it cannot be
ascertained.

“Even in such cases why should there be any doubt? A general statement
always applies to all particular cases; so that if any particular form
of it is followed, the ordinances become followed.”

For instance, when we have the law that ‘one should rinse his mouth
*with water*,’—with what water, of a well, or a tank, or a river, being
not specified,—the behests of the law would be duly obeyed by rinsing
the mouth with water obtained from any one of these sources.

True; but there are cases where we have a text prohibiting a certain
act, but no expiation is laid down in reference to that act; and it is
such cases that are contemplated by the present verse.

For instance, there is the following case—There is a vessel polluted by
the touch of the Śūdra’s mouth,—and before it has been cleansed some one
takes his food out of it;—now what would be the expiation in this case?
This question cannot be answered by anything that has been laid down.
There is the text laying down the expiation in connection with pollution
caused by the touch of the mouth of ‘*the woman and the Śūdra*’; but
what is polluted by the ‘*woman and the Śūdra*,’ cannot be held to be
‘*polluted by the Śūdra* (only).’

In such doubtful cases, one should act up to the declaration of cultured
men. For such doubts can arise only in the minds of *Śūdras* and others,
who are not learned Brāhmaṇas; and it is only right that they should do
what is taught by cultured men; so that in all cases, reductions or
enhancements in the exact expiation should be always accepted in
accordance with the decision of these people.

Nor would these cultured men be doing anything wrong in declaring the
law on doubtful points; since it is declared that—‘that should be the
undoubted law.’ If they pronounced a wrong opinion they would certainly
be doing something wrong. For in matters relating to Dharma there can be
no two opinions. In a case where there is a doubt regarding the exact
‘*gotra*’ and ‘*pravara*’ of a certain person,—when no one happens to
remember them, how could the exact *gotra* or *pravara* be determined by
any declaration of the Brāhmaṇas? It is for this reason that it has been
asserted that where the *gotra* or *pravara* is doubtful, it shall
remain doubtful. The *pravara* is doubtful only when the *gotra* is
doubtful; when there is no doubt regarding the *gotra*, there can be
none regarding the *pravara*, as the exact *pravaras* relating to each
*gotra* have been clearly described. But since there are several
*pravaras* mentioned in connection with several *gotras*, the *gotra*
would remain doubtful even when the *pravaras* are known.—(108)


