+++
title = "118 सर्वम् आत्मनि"

+++
‘*All things*’—the world—‘*real and unreal*’—*i.e*., which is liable to
be produced and to be destroyed; or that which is eternal like the
*Ākāśa*, or what is an absolute non-entity, like the ‘hare’s horn’—all
this one should perceive in the Self;—that is, he should contemplate
upon all this as centred in the Self.

What ‘*perceiving*’ connotes is a clear conception; and this can only be
obtained by constant contemplation; as no dear conception of a thing can
be obtained by merely seeing it once. It is for this reason that the
Esoteric Science has been propounded. And in connection with the
contemplation of the Self, we have such texts as—‘It should be listened
to, thought, upon and meditated upon,’ where the act of *seeing* is
spoken of as extending up to *meditation*.

That is called ‘Contemplation of the Self’ which consists in repeated
meditation upon It, without the intervention of any other foreign
object.

Or, mere *repetition* (of the act of seeing) may be taken as what is
implied by the term ‘*perceive*’ As a matter of fact, all purificatory
acts have their purpose fulfilled only when they impart to the purified
object a certain peculiar excellence; as is found in the case of the
thumping of the corn; where, even though the repetition of the act of
thumping is not directly laid down, yet it becomes implied by the fact
that without such repeated thumping the corns cannot be cleared of all
their husk. If the act were to be left off before this had been
accomplished, it could only be regarded as leading to some invisible
(transcendental) result; and in that case the act would cease to be
‘purificatory’.

For this reason the term ‘*should perceive*’ should be taken to mean the
giving up of all other acts, and the repeating of the act of perceiving
of the one object in view.

In regard to the ‘*Self*’ spoken of here, people dispute over its exact
meaning:—“What is it that is called ‘Self,’ ‘*ātman*’? (A) If it stands
for the Conscious Entity ensouling the body, then this is inconsistent
with what follows regarding ‘the Ruler, the Soul, bright like gold, eta,
etc.’ (in 122); since we do not hear of anybody appearing for such a
being,—since what is declared regarding It is—‘O Gārgi, the Sun and the
Moon remain under the control of this Imperishable One, so also Heaven
and Earth have been upheld by him’ (*Bṛhadāraṇyaka*

*Upaniṣad*). For those reasons the transmigratory process cannot belong
to that Self with regard to which we have the notion of ‘I’; so that
some other form will have to be pointed out as belonging to the ‘Self’
spoken of here. Further, under the said explanation, by virtue of what
the text lays down regarding ‘perceiving all things in the Self,’ even
things external, at least in their spiritual aspects, will have to be
regarded as being resolved into the Individual Soul (which is absurd).
The only alternative left is to regard the ‘Self’ as standing for that
which is the original source of all Being, of the whole Universe, one
that interpenetrates all entities. Hut in regard to this it will be
necessary to explain what exactly would be meant by^(‘)perceiving all
things in the Self.’ Others have held that what is referred to is the
Bodily Self, in which all things are to be perceived.

Our explanation is as follows—As regards the term ‘*ātman*,’ ‘Self,’ it
has been already shown that all authorities agree in pointing to its
standing for the Supreme Self. As for what has been said above regarding
the necessity for pointing out the exact form of the ‘Self’ here
meant,—what else could be said on the point, except what is found
asserted under the Injunctions of ‘listening to......and knowing’ this
Self;—all such injunctions can be found out from the various Upaniṣads
belonging to the various Vedic texts. Then again, it is because there
are other proofs also of the unity of this Self that Miśra has taken
such pains to explain the actual facts of perception (which point to
diversity). The following passage is found in the *Vākyapadīya*—‘There
is nothing in name, etc.’ The fact of this Self being comprehended with
the help of Injunctions may be ascertained from the fact of the Body
being Its covering, etc.

As for the objection as to how what is ‘*asat*’ (unreal) can be seen;—in
the phrase ‘the *real and the unreal*’ the term ‘*real*’ stands for the
whole aggregate of worldly products, and ‘*unreal*’ for such subtle
objects as are ordinarily *not perceptible*.

Another question that has been raised is—“How can the Supreme Self have
any connection with *hearing* (such as is mentioned in the Injunction
that ‘the Self should be heard, etc., etc.)?’”

But what to say of connection with *Hearing*? In fact the birth,
existence and dissolution of the entire Universe has been proved to have
its source in that Self.

As for the Injunction regarding the resolving of all things into the
Self,—what is actually meant is that ‘whatever appears to be diverse,
all that one should resolve into that *One* Entity.’ And what is meant
by everything subsisting in the Self, is that one should cease to have
any hankering for the things of the world.

‘*With concentrated mind*.’—This ‘*Concentration*’ means ‘the
controlling of the operation of the mind’; and how this is to be done is
to be learnt from the *Yoga-śāstra*.

‘*Never turns his mind towards wrong*.’—This connotes the immobility of
the intellect and the mind. What is here prescribed should be practised
until the mind ceases to be perturbed by disputants; and whatever there
may be of diversity should he resolved into the one Supreme Self.—118


