+++
title = "030 प्रणष्ट-स्वामिकं रिक्थम्"

+++
This rule is meant for only such property as does not belong to a
Brāhmaṇa—says Nandana.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 778), which notes that the rule
(relating to the keeping of the property for three years) pertains to
the case of property belonging to Brāhmaṇas with exceptional
qualifications;—in *Mitākṣarā* on 2.38, which notes that the meaning is
that for three years, the property must be kept in safe custody; if the
owner turns up before the lapse of one year, the entire property should
be handed over to him; but if he turns up after one year then a portion
of the property is to be taken by the king as fee for keeping it; the
proportion being specified below in verse 33; it adds that the last
clause, permits the king to spend the property after three years, only
in the case of the owner not turning up at all.—It is quoted again under
1.173, where it is noted that the period of three years is meant for the
case of the owner being a Brāhmaṇa ‘endowed with learning and
character.’

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 226), which notes that this only
permits the king to *make use* of the property (not to make it his own).
In view of what the *Mitākṣarā* and *Aparārka* have said, it is
interesting to note that *Madnapārijāta* reads ‘*abdam*’ and ‘*abdāt*’,
which clearly puts down the period as *one year* only.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 87), which also notes that the
rules refer to the property of a Brāhmaṇa learned in the Veda.

This is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 266), which adds the
following notes:—Reading this text along with *Yājñavalkya* (2-33), we
take the rule to be that, if the owner turns up before the lapse of one
year, the entire property should be made over to him, but if after that,
the king should take from it his own share;—for three years he should
keep the property in the same condition in which it was found; and after
that he is permitted to spend out of it;—and if the owner turns up after
three years, then the king should take out of it his own share, which
should be equal to that of the owner,—giving the fourth part of the
royal share to the man who found the property.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Āhnika, p. 36a and Vyavahāra, p. 27b).


