+++
title = "033 आददीताऽथ षड्भागम्"

+++
Which particular part of the property is to be taken by the king in any
particular case shall depend upon the length of time for which it has
been kept by the king (Medhātithi and Rāghavānanda),—or on the trouble
involved in keeping it (Medhātithi and Govindarāja),—or on the character
of the owner (Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.33), which concludes that
dining the first year, the king should hand over to the owner the entire
property, keeping nothing for the state,—during the second year he
should keep for the state the twelfth part of it,—during the third year,
its tenth part,—and during the fourth year and onwards, the sixth part;
and in every case the fourth part of the royal share should be given to
the man who found the property.—This is again quoted in the same work
under 2.173, where also the same explanation is accepted.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 778), which declares that whether the
king shall take the larger or smaller share shall depend upon the
trouble involved in the keeping of the property.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 87), which accepts the
explanation given in the *Mitākṣarā*, and adds that the rule that the
king should take the whole property after the lapse of three years is
meant for those cases where the owner of the property is not known; but
in cases where it is known that such and such an article has been
forgotten here by this or that man,—the property has to be handed over
to him, even though he may turn up after the lapse of three years.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 347), which adds the following
notes;—‘*Praṇaṣṭādhigatāt*’ means ‘out of the property that was lost,
discovered *and kept in custody*;’—the alternatives regarding the
portion to be taken by the king are based upon the amount of trouble
involved in the keeping of the property;—this rule is meant for the case
of property other than the ‘single-hoofed’ and the rest mentioned in
Yājñavalkya (2.174).

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 226);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Rājanīti, p. 265), which adds the following notes:—‘*Praṇaṣṭa*’ means
‘fallen away from the possession of the owner—if some such property has
been found by the customs-officer or other officers guarding the place,
and brought over to the king,—then out of that, if the owner should turn
up to claim it during the first year, the king should hand over to him
the whole of it,—if during the second year, he should keep for the state
the twelfth part of it,—during the third year, the tenth part, and
during the fourth year and onwards, the sixth part, adding that the
increased share is justified by the increased trouble involved in
keeping the property for a longer period.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 27b).


