+++
title = "049 धर्मेण व्यवहारेण"

+++
‘*Vyavahāreṇa*’.—‘By business-transaction: advancing more money to the
debtor with which, as capital, the latter would carry on some trade,
with the profits of which he would gradually clear off the older debt
also’ (Medhātithi);—‘by law-suit’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka and Narāyāṇa;
noted but rejected by Medhātithi);—‘by threatening a suit’
(Nandana);—‘by forced sale of property’ (Rāghavānanda).

Both Buhler and Hopkins represent Medhātithi as explaining this term to
mean ‘forced labour’. But there is nothing in Medhātithi to show this.
What Medhātithi means is quite clear, and it is made clearer by the
illustration given by him of ‘*karṇodaka*’; it is a common practice in
India that when water gets into the ear and cannot be easily got out,
people pour more water into it, and along with this latter, the former
water also flows out.

This verse is quoted in and *Aparārka* (p. 645), which adds the
following notes:—‘*dharma*:’ is ‘truth’,—‘*vyavahāra*’, stands for such
evidence as is documentary, oral and so forth,—‘*chala*’ is
*trick*,—‘*ācaritam*,’ ‘custom of the country’,—‘*balam*’ means
oppression by starving and so forth.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 67);—and in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.40),
which adds the following notes:—‘*dharmeṇa*,’ *i.e*., ‘by truthful
persuasion’,—‘*vyavahāreṇa*’, *i.e*., ‘by adducing witnesses, documents
and other kinds of evidence’,—‘*chalena*’, *i.e*., borrowing from him
ornaments and other things under the pretext of some ceremonies &c. in
the family,—‘*ācaritena*’, *i.e*., by starving,—the fifth method being
the application of ‘*bala*’, force, in the shape of keeping him chained
and so forth;—by these methods is the creditor to recover the money that
he had advanced on interest.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 191);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 19a);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (78b).


