+++
title = "120 लोभात् सहस्रम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 82);—and in
*Mitākṣarā* (on 2.811), which adds the following notes—‘*Lobha*’ is
greed for wealth,—‘*moha*’, wrong information,—‘*bhaya*’,
fear,—‘*maitrī*’, too much affection,—‘*kāma*’, longing for intercourse
with women,—‘*krodha*’, anger. It adds that the 1,000 and other numbers
refer to so many *copper paṇas*.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 680), which adds the following notes:—The
numbers here mentioned refer to *kārṣāpaṇas*. Some people might think
that there are two kinds of perjury—one through greed and the rest, for
which the penalty shall he as prescribed by *Manu*, and another due to
other causes, for which the penalty would be that prescribed by
*Yājñavalkya* (2.81). But this would not he the right view, because as
already shown by Manu (in 118), people commit perjury only through greed
and other causes enumerated therein.

It is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 191), which says:—If the witness
lie, through avarice, he should he fined 1,000 *paṇas*,—if through
delusion, 250 *paṇas*,—if through fear 1,000 *paṇas*,—if through
friendliness 1,000 *paṇas*;—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (37a), which says
that ‘thousand’ *paṇas* are meant,—‘*mohāt*’ means ‘through
absent-mindedness’—that ‘*pūrva sāhasa*’ stands for 250 *paṇas*,—‘*dvau
madhyamau*’ means ‘*dvau madhyamau sāhasau*’, which means 1,000
*paṇas*,—‘*pūrvam*’ means ‘first amercement’, four times of which means
1,000 *paṇas*.


