+++
title = "125 उपस्थम् उदरम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 156);—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 399);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 630), which
adds that this should not be taken to be an exhaustive list;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti. p. 293), which adds that the punishment
should be inflicted upon that part of the body by which the crime might
have been committed.

It has been quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.26), which makes the remark that
has been reproduced in *Vīramitrodaya*; —*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the
following notes:—‘*Dhana*’ is mentioned among the ‘sthānas’ with a view
to indicate that when the crime committed pertains to wealth, the
punishment also should pertain to that only; or it may be that the
punishment here meant is different from ‘fine’ (which is what has gone
before), and may be taken to stand for that physical pain which is
caused by the confiscation of some property; in the crime of adultery
the punishment should fall on the sexual organ,—in that of eating
improper food, on the stomach, such as starvation and so forth,—in
defamation, on the tongue, such as cutting it off,—in theft, on the
hands,—in misbehaviour with the feet, such as walking ahead of a
superior person, on the feet,—in trying to look at the king’s harem, on
the eyes,—in stealthily smelling his scents, on the nose,—in
eaves-dropping on the king’s councils, on the ears,—in the case of
heinous crimes, on the body, *i.e*., death.


