+++
title = "139 ऋणे देये"

+++
‘*Taddviguṇam*’—‘Double of 5 p. c., *i.e*., 10 p. c.’ This is the
explanation, accepted by all the commentators. But Medhātithi mentions
‘others’ as explaining the meaning to be ‘double of the amount of the
debt’ This latter would be more in keeping with what has gone before in
verse 59.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 77), which adds the
following notes:—The meaning is as follows: If the debt is at first
denied, and subsequently admitted, then the debtor should be fined 5 per
cent on the amount of debt; but if he does not admit it even
subsequently—and yet the debt becomes proved by the evidence
adduced,—then the man shall be fined the ‘double of that,’ *i.e*., 10
per cent. It proceeds to add a note which serves to explain the
inconsistency of this rule with what has gone in verse 59:—the diversity
is due to considerations of the nature of the debtor’s motives.

It is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 34), which adds the explanation
that ‘when a debt is denied at first and subsequently admitted, the
debtor is to he fined 5 per cent, and if the man continues to deny the
debt which is subsequently proved, the fine is to be 10 per cent; and
adds that this refers to cases where the debtor is poor’;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (81a), which has the following explanation:—(a) If the
man has denied the debt but admits it when sued in Court, then he is to
be fined 5 p. c., (b) if he continues to deny it in the Court, but the
debt is subsequently proved, then the fine is 10 per cent;—this refers
to cases where the former denial has been based upon some
misapprehension on the part of the debtor; the case where the denial is
through perversity and intentional, has been dealt with under 59.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 111a), which explains the
meaning to be ‘when the man having denied the debt at first, admits it
when sued and brought before the Court, he should pay a fine of 5 p. c.
and if he continues to deny it, but is subsequently forced by evidence
to admit, then 10 p. c.’


