+++
title = "151 कुसीदवृद्धिर् द्वैगुण्यम्"

+++
‘*Smṛtyantare*’—(Medhātithi, p. 967, l. 30)—see Yājñavalkya (2. 39
)—‘*Vastradhānyahiraṇyānām catustridviguṇā parā*’, and in *Nārada*
(107)—‘*Hiraṇyadhānyavastrāṇām vṛddhirdvitricaturguṇā*.’

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 2.39), which adds the following
notes:—Capital invested for increase is called ‘*kusīda*’,—the increase
thereof is called ‘*vṛddhi*’;—and this never goes beyond, exceeds, the
double,—if it is the first original investment; in the case of the
investment being one that has been transferred from one person to
another, it *can* exceed the double,—as it becomes, in tins case, a
fresh transaction.—If we adopt the reading ‘*āhṛtā*’ (in place of
‘*āhitā*’), the meaning would he that the amount cannot exceed the
double only in the case where the interest is paid all at one time, and
that in a case where it is paid by gradual instalments—daily, monthly or
yearly,—it does exceed the double. It goes on—‘The rule applies to cases
where the loan has been advanced in one instalment, and is also paid
back in one instalment; in cases where the loan has been transferred to
another person, or a fresh transaction is entered into by the same
parties after certain additions and subtractions, the interest does go
on accumulating even after the principal, along with the interest, has
reached the amount which is double of the original principal.—On the
second half of the verse it remarks that in the case of grains and roots
and flowers and fruits, the quantity payable may become five times of
the principal. It explains ‘*śada*’ as *agricultural products*, fruits,
flowers etc.,—‘*lava*’ as the wool of sheep, the hair of the *camarī*
cow find so forth,—‘*vāhya*’ as ‘bullocks, horses and the like.’
Interest on these cannot go beyond five times the principal.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 643), which adds that the term ‘*sakṛt*’
makes it clear that the amount can exceed the double, in a case where
with the consent of the debtor the accrued interest is added on to the
principal and a fresh transaction entered into. It adds that this
applies only to transactions in *gold*.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 76), which adds that Vijñaneśvara
and others have held that in a case where interest has been paid by
instalments at intervals, the total amount of the amount to be paid
ultimately may exceed the double.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 17), which adds the following
explanatory notes:—‘*Dhānye*’, barley, *vrīhi* and the rest,—‘*sade*’,
fruits and other products from trees,—‘*lave*’, wool of the sheep, hair
of the *Camarī* and so forth, the etymological meaning being ‘what is
shorn’, ‘*lūyate*’;—‘*vāhye*’, ‘what is *driven*’, the horse and so
forth;—if any of these things is lent, on interest, like gold and
silver,—the amount to be paid should not exceed five times the
principal. It is just possible that some one may borrow a hundredweight
of grains, or a hundred horses, on loan at the rate of 2 per cent
interest;—such a debtor, even after a very long time, can repay only
*five hundred*, not more. The present text lays down ‘five times’ as the
limit in the case of grain; but Bṛhaspati has fixed this limit at ‘four
times’; while ‘three times’ is the limit fixed by Viṣṇu, Marīci,
Vaśiṣṭha and Hārīta. In view of these alternative limits, the decision
in any particular case will have to be determined by the character of
the debtor concerned, or the nature of the time, and consideration of
scarcity or affluence.

This verse is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 18b);—in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 326), which explains ‘*sada*’ as the produce of
cultivation, other than, corn,—*e.g*., fruits and other
things,—‘*vāhya*’ as ‘bullock and the rest’,—and ‘*lava*’ as ‘wool and
the like;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 11), which says that at one
transaction, in the case of gems and things of that kind also, the
interest cannot go beyond the double;—that in grains etc. it can go upto
fivefold; but in repeated transactions it can go beyond the said
‘double’; it notes the reading ‘*sakṛdāhitā*’; it explains ‘*vāhya*’
as‘bullock and the like’,—‘*śada*’ as ‘field-prodce’,—‘*lava*’ as ‘that
which is lopped off’, *i.e*., wool, except that of the sheep.


