+++
title = "153 नाऽति-सांवत्सरीं वृद्धिम्"

+++
‘A creditor may take, for the term of a year, interest which has been
settled by the following agreement—“when one, two or three months have
passed, the interest on the capital shall be calculated and paid to me
at one time”; but he shall not take the interest according to the
agreement, if the year has passed’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘If the
creditor does not take the money due for two or three years, and the
debtor pays then, the creditor shall not take more interest than for one
year’ (Govindarāja).

‘*Adrṣṭam*’—‘Not found (in the *Śāstras*)’ (Medhātithi, Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda);—‘not accumulated by the lapse of several months’
(Medhātithi, alternatively and Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Kālavṛddhiḥ*’—‘Periodical (*i.e*., monthly) interest’ (Medhātithi,
Govindarāja, Nārāyaṇa and Kullūka, who is not rightly represented by
Buhler).—See Nārada —‘*Pratimāsam bhavantī yā vṛddhiḥ sā kālikā sṛmtā*
(*smṛta*?)’ (‘*kālikā*’ being the technical name for *monthly interest*,
*kālavṛddhiḥ*).

‘*Kāyikā*’—‘To be paid by bodily labour’ (Medhātithi),—or ‘by the use of
a pledged animal or slave’ (Medhātithi, alternative, Kullūka,
Rāghavānanda and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 9), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Atisāṃvatsarī*’ is that which has gone beyond a year.
The meaning is that if the creditor, suspecting an early repayment of
the loan, should stipulate that the loan must continue for a certain
time, then he cannot stipulate for more than a year. Halāyudha, however
holds the meaning to be that however much be the eagerness of the
creditor to earn much interest, he should receive payment before one
year passes, and not beyond that.—Nor should he receive an interest that
is ‘*adṛṣtā*,’ ‘not permitted by the scriptures.’—There are four kinds
of interest not permitted,—*cakravṛddhi*, *kālavṛddhi*, *kāritā* and
*kāyikā*; these he should not take.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 229);—in *Vīdhanapārijāta* (II, p.
252);—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Āhnika, 36a);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (67b),
which adds the explanation.—‘The interest is to be calculated from the
first month upto the end of the year, and not beyond that.’


