+++
title = "154 ऋणन् दातुम्"

+++
*Karaṇa*’—‘Written bond’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘written bond and
witnesses’ (Medhātithi).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 193), which
adds the following explanation:—‘When the time for repayment arrives, if
the debtor, find himself unable to pay the whole amount due—the
principal along with accrued interest,—and the creditor is unwilling to
keep the loan hanging,—and should wish to renew the transaction on the
same terms, he should pay the accrued interest and renew the bond, dated
afresh with the new date.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 72), as laying down one of the
methods of ‘compound interest.’ It adds the following
notes:—‘*Nirjitām*,’ legally due to the creditor; of this accrued
interest he should pay either the whole, or a part only, and add the
remainder to the principal and renew the bond for the total;—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 19b);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (80a), which
explains ‘*nirjitām*’ as ‘determined to have already accrued to the
creditor,’—and ‘*karaṇ* *am parivartayet*’ as ‘should write another
document attested by fresh witnesses’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 104a).

At the end of Adhyāya VIII, Mandlik has printed the following verse with
Medhātithi’s explanation thereupon—

> atha śaktivihīnaḥ syād ṛṇī kālaviparyayāt \|  
> śakyaprekṣam ṛṇaṃ dāpyaḥ kāle deśe yathodayam \|\|

This verse, though commented upon by Medhātithi, has been omitted by all
other commentators.

It is found in Nārada (131.) It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 71)
as from Nārada; it explains ‘*Śaktivihīnaḥ*’ as ‘without ability to
repay the debt,’ and ‘*kālaviparyayāt*’ as ‘on account of famine and so
forth.’

The verse is not Manu’s, it is Nārada’s; and it has been only quoted by
Medhātithi and explained by him in course of his comment on verse 159.


