+++
title = "177 कर्मणापि समम्"

+++
*Cf*. 8.49, and 9.229; also 8.415.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.43), which explains the meaning
to be that “the debtor should make himself ‘*samam*’, equal, to the
creditor by putting an end ṭo the relation of creditor and debtor”;—in
*Aparārka* (p. 146), which explains the meaning to be that “even by
doing some work for the creditor, the debtor should make himself equal,
similar, to the creditor, by becoming free from debt”;—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 70), which adds the following explanation:—The
debtor, who is either of the same caste with, or of a lower caste than,
the creditor, should, even by means of working, clear off his debt, and
thereby render himself *equal* to the creditor. So long as the debt is
not paid off, there is an *inequality* between them—one being the
*creditor* and the other the *debtor*; but when by means of work, the
debt has been paid off, both of them become ‘equal’.—But if the debtor
belongs to a *higher* caste, he should not be made by the creditor to
work for him.

It is quoted also in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 89);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(79b), which explains ‘*samam kuryāt*’ as ‘remove his *indebtedness*,
which puts him in a position lower than that of his creditor, by doing
such work for the latter as would suffice to liquify the amount of
debt’—‘*śreyān*’ is ‘one belonging to a higher caste’ and also ‘one
possessed of higher qualifications’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
104b), which also has the same explanation.


