+++
title = "192 निक्षेपस्याऽपहर्तारन् तत्समम्"

+++
This verse appears to be a mere repetition of 191. According to
Medhātithi, 191 lays down two alternative punishments—corporal
punishment (thief’s penalty) and fine; and 192 excludes the ‘thief’s
punishment’ by specifying the fine only. He repudiates the explanation
that has been attributed to him by Hopkins—*viz*., 192 is for the sake
of freeing the *Brāhmaṇa* from the corporal punishment prescribed in
191. Nor is there anything in Medhātithi to show that he takes 192 as
referring to fresh offences,—a view that has been attributed to him by
Buhler.—Both these views are found in Kullūka.

‘*Upanidhi*’—‘Sealed deposit’ (Kullūka);—‘something lent in a friendly
spirit’ (Medhātithi, who repudiates, in the present context, the
technical meaning of ‘sealed deposit.’)

‘*Aviśeṣeṇa*’—‘Irrespective of the character of the property or the
caste of the person’ (Medhātithi);—‘irrespective of caste’ (Nārāyaṇa and
Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 92), which adds the
following explanation:—The reiteration of ‘fine equal in value to the
deposit’ here—to the exclusion of the ‘thiefs penalty,’ with which it
has been coupled in the preceding verse,—should be understood as meant
for the case where the misappropriator of the deposit is a Brāhmaṇa. The
terms ‘*tathā*’ and ‘*aviśeṣeṇa*’ mean that all that has been said in
regard to the misappropration of the deposit, should he understood to be
applicable to that of the *Upanidhi* also,—the misappropriation of both
standing on the same footing.

It is quoted also in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 85);—in *Kṛtyakalpataru*
(83b);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 113a).


