+++
title = "198 अवहार्यो भवेच्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 103), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Avahāryo bhavet*,’ should be fined;—‘*svānvayaḥ*’
(which is its reading for ‘*sānvayaḥ*’) a son or some relation of the
rightful owner;—‘*ṣaṭśatam*,’ six hundred *paṇas*;—‘*niranvayaḥ*,’ not
related to the rightful owner;—‘*anapasaraḥ*,’ means *the removing of
the property from the owner’s house*;—and the man who does this and
sells what belongs to another should be fined six hundred *paṇas*. If
this seller is not a relative of the owner,—and if the removing of the
property from the owner’s house has been done, not by any person related
to the owner, but by the seller himself,—then he should be punished like
a thief. If however the removing has been done by some one else, but the
selling is done by the owner’s relative, then the fine may be even more
than six hundred *paṇas*.—The author of

*Kalpataru* has explained ‘*apasara*’ as the justification for moving
the article from the owner’s possession—such as its being a gift and so
forth *by which property moves away from the owner’s possession*
(*apasarati anena*); and he who has no such justification is
‘*anapasara*’; and this writer adds that this view has the support of
Bhāguri, Medhātithi and the *Vṛttikāra*.

It is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 41) which has the following
notes:—‘*Avahāryaḥ*,’ should be made to give up,—‘*sānvayaḥ*’ belonging
to the family of the owner of the property concerned,—‘*niranvayaḥ*,’
not a member of the owner’s family,—‘*anapasaraḥ*,’ ‘who has not
received the property by any equitable method of acquisition, such as
gift and the like’—‘*ṣaṭśatam*,’ he is to be fined 600 *paṇas*;—and in
*Kṛtyakalpataru* (85b), which explains ‘*avahāryaḥ*’ as ‘should be made
to pay—‘*sānvayaḥ*’, as ‘along with his brothers and
relatives,’—‘*ṣaṭśatam*,’ *i.e*., 600 *paṇas*.—It goes on to say what
has been quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (above).


