+++
title = "202 अथ मूलम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 103), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Mūlam*,’ the original seller, who sold the article
which did not belong to him;—if he is ‘*anāhārya*’, incapable of being
produced by the purchaser, by reason of his being in a foreign
country;—but the purchaser is one who had made his purchase openly,—then
this latter is not to be punished;—but the actual owner shall receive
back his property which had been fraudulently sold.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 87), which reading ‘*anāhārya*’
for ‘*anāhāryam*’, explains it as ‘not producing;’—the meaning being
‘even though the buyer is unable to produce the original seller, if his
purchase is found to be *bona fide* by reason of its having been done in
public.’

It is quoted in *Aparārka*, (p. 776), which adds the following
explanation:—‘*Mūlam*’ is the original seller;—if he is incapable of
being produced by reason of his whereabouts being unknown.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 215), which adds that
the rightful owner is to receive his property from the purchaser, only
on paying to him one half of the price that had been paid for it;—this
opinion being based upon a clear declaration to that effect by
Kātyāyana;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 43), which adds the following
explanation:—‘Where the selling has been done openly,—and yet the
original owner proves his claim to the property concerned,—and the
property concerned is not returnable, by reason of its having been
exported to foreign lands, and so forth—then the *bona fide* purchaser
is not to be punished, but he is to be made to refund the price to the
real owner—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (86a).


