+++
title = "210 सर्वेषाम् अर्धिनो"

+++
The total fee being 112, the shares are 56, 28, 16, 12 (Medhātithi);—the
total being 100, the shares are 48, 24, 16, 12 (Rāghavānanda, Nārāyaṇa
and Kullūka); \[Buhler wrongly puts the last figure as 8\];—the total
fee shall be divided into 25 shares and the several classes shall
receive 12, 6, 4 and 3 respectively.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 118), which adds the
following notes:—At the *Jyotiṣṭoma*, 100 cows have been laid down as
the fee for the 16 priests; and the present rule prescribes what part of
it is to be given to which priest; the four ‘principal’ priests—*e.g*.,
the *Hotṛ*, *Adhvaryu Brahman* and *Udgātṛ*—are ‘*ardhinaḥ*’, *entitled
to one half*; with a view to the total available, this ‘one half must be
understood to be 48; so that 48 cows are to be given to the principal
priests’;—the next class, consisting of the *Maitrāvaruṇa*,
*Pratiprasthātṛ*, *Brāhmaṇacchaṃsi* and *Prastotṛ* are to receive half
of the ‘half-sharers’, *i.e*., 24 cows have to be given to these;—the
next class, consisting of the *Acchāvāka*, *Neṣṭr*, *Agnīdhra* and
*Pratihartṛ*, are entitled to a third part of the ‘half-sharers’; so
that they are to receive 16 cows;—the last class consisting of the
*Grāvastotṛ*, *Netṛ*, *Potṛ* and *Subrahmaṇya*, are to receive a quarter
of the ‘half-sharers’; so that these receive 12 cows.—This division, it
adds, his based upon the text ‘*ardhino dīkṣayati*’ which actually names
the priests ‘*ardhinaḥ*,’ ‘half-sharers’, and so forth.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.265), which lays down the same
classification and division as the *Vivādaratnākara*. It raises the
following question:—“This division cannot be acceptable, as we find
neither any convention to the effect, nor is the fee of the nature of
capital jointly raised, nor is there any Vedic text actually prescribing
such shares. So that, under the circumstances, the most equitable
division would be that every one should receive an equal share,
according to the rule laid down in *Mīmāṃsā-sūtra*—‘*Samam syāt
aśrutatvāt*’, ‘it must be equal, as nothing else has been directly
prescribed’; or that each one should receive what is due to him in
consideration of the work actually done by him.”—It answers this
objection as follows:—Unless we accept the division suggested, we cannot
account for the names ‘*ardhinaḥ*’ (half sharers), ‘*Tṛtīyinaḥ*’ (third
sharers), and ‘*Pādinaḥ*’(quarter sharers), which we find in a text in
connection with the *Dvādaśāha* sacrifice, which has the *Jyotiṣṭoma*
for its archetype; these names would be meaningless if they were not
taken as indicating the share of the priests in the sacrificial fee.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 837), which adds that though the first
class of priests gets only 48, which is not quite *half* of *100*, yet
it is very close to it; hence they may be called ‘Half sharers’; it has
the same division as in *Mitākṣarā*.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 739);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (90a),
which adds the following explanation:—‘*Sarveṣām*’, among the sixteen
priests engaged in the sarcrifice, out of the 100 cows, the prescribed
sacrificial fee, one half is to go to the principal priests, *viz*.,
Hotṛ, Brāhmaṇa, Adhvaryu and Udgātṛ; even though they may receive a
little less than the exact one half, they may be called ‘*ardhinaḥ*’,
‘Halfers’; the second set, consisting of the Maitrāvaruṇa,
Brāhmaṇacchaṃsin, Pratiprasthātṛ and Prastotṛ, are entitled to half of
what is received by the former set; the third set, consisting of the
*Acchāvāka*, *Agnīdhra*, *Neṣtṛ* and *Pratihartṛ*, receive the third
part of what is received by the first set;—and the fourth set,
consisting of the *Grāvastut*, *Netṛ*, *Unnetṛ* and *Subrahmaṇya*,
receive the fourth part of what is received by the first set.
