+++
title = "222 क्रीत्वा विक्रीय"

+++
“According to Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Kullūka, the rule refers to
things which are not easily spoilt, such as land, copper etc., not to
flowers, fruit and the like;—according to Nārāyaṇa, to grain and
seeds.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.177), which adds that this refers
to such things as get spoilt by use,—*e.g*., houses beds, seats etc;—and
*not* to seeds, metals, beasts of burden, gems, slave-girls, milking
animals and slaves, for whom Yājñavalkya prescribes a period of 10, 1,
5, 7, 30, 3 and 15 days respectively. It goes on to add that the
provision here made is applicable to only those cases where the
commodity was purchased without proper examination; in cases where it
has been duly tested and examined before purchase, the transaction
cannot be rescinded.—The verse is quoted again on 2.254.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 831);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 190),
which adds the following notes:—‘*Anuśayaḥ*,’ *desire to withdraw*, or,
as some people hold, *repentance*;—‘*dadyāt*’, *should return*,—*i.e*.
the buyer to the seller;—‘*ādodīta*,’ *should take back*, *i.e*., t he
seller from the buyer;—this refers to such things as are likely to be
spoilt by use, such as houses, fields, conveyances and so forth,—as also
seeds; but not metals, beasts of burden and such other tilings.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 515), which adds that what is stated
here refers to things other than those enumerated by *Yājñavalkya*
(2.177);—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 947);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p.
88);—and in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (108b).


