+++
title = "234 कर्णौ चर्म"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.164), to the effect, that if the
cattle placed in charge of a keeper should die by chance, then he should
make over its ear and other things to the owner;—where *Bālambhaṭṭī*
adds the following notes:—‘*Charma*’, skin;—‘*bālān*’, hairs, as
indicating the death of the animal;—‘*basti*,’ a part of the urinary
organ;—‘*snāyu*’ is fat;—‘*pūyāni*’ is another reading;—‘*rocanā*’, the
yellow pigment in the cow’s eyes;—all these should be shown to the owner
of the cattle;—when these die; and other parts of its body also should
be brought up; such as the horns, hoofs and so forth, which would
indicate the particular animal that may have died. If we read
‘*Aṅkāṃśca*,’ it would mean the marks made on the body of the animal
should be shown; in the reading ‘*aṅkāni*’ or ‘*aṅgāni*,’ the meaning
would be that while showing the marks, he should hand over the ears &c.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 175), which notes that all that is
meant by mentioning the ‘ears’ &c. is that the distinguishing features
of the dead animal should be shown. It explains ‘*mṛteṣu*’ as ‘in the
case of those dying at a distance’, and ‘*aṅgāni*’ as such comparatively
lasting parts of the body as the horns and so forth. It notes that
‘*aṅgādi*’ is another reading for ‘*aṅgāni*’, in which case ‘*ādi*’
stands for such other *signs of this animal* as may be well known.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 265), as laying down
that in the case of animals dying by chance, its ear &c. should be shown
to the owner;—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 96), as laying down sure
evidence of the death of cattle; it explains ‘*aṅka*’ as the horn and so
forth, ‘as explained by Madana’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
137a), which notes the readings ‘*aṅgādi*’, ‘*aṅgāni*’ and
‘*aṅkādi*’,—it explains ‘*aṅka*’ as ‘such marks of recognition as the
horn, the ears and so forth’,—and adds that ‘*ādi*’ is meant to include
*witnesses*.


