+++
title = "275 मातरम् पितरम्"

+++
‘*Ākṣārayan*’—‘Defames, by causing dissension’ (Medhātithi),—‘accuses of
a heinous crime’ (Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda),—‘accuses of
incest’ (Nārāyaṇa),—‘makes them angry’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.204), which (reading ‘*Śvaśuram*’
for ‘*tanayam*’) adds that this refers to cases where the wife is
*innocent* of what is said against her, and. where the mother and the
rest are even *guilty* of what is alleged. *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the
following notes:—‘*Ākṣārayan*,’ defaming,—‘*adadat*,’ not leaving in
favour of;—what *Mitākṣarā* says in regard to this rule answers the
objection taken against it by Kullūka, that some explanation should be
found for the same penalty being prescribed for insulting all the
persons mentioned here;—Medhātithi, on the other hand, adopting the
reading ‘*tanayam*,’ has explained ‘*ākṣārayan*’ as *causing dissension*
among the persons mentioned.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 149b), which explains
‘*bhrātaram*’ as ‘elder brother,’ and adds that this refers to cases
where the elders have done some mischief, and the wife has done nothing
wrong;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 295), which adds the same
note as *Mitākṣarā*;—and in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 99), which adds that
the ‘brother meant here is the *elder* one, since he is mentioned along
with the father and the rest,’ and adds that *Mitākṣarā* and other works
have declared that this refers to the wife only when she is innocent,
and to the mother and others even when they are guilty.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 250), which reads ‘*tanayam*,’ and
explains ‘*ākṣārayan*’ as ‘subjecting’ to insult—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Vyavahāra, 44b).


