+++
title = "279 येन केन"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 258), which explains
‘*hiṃsyāt*,’ as ‘strikes,’—‘*śreyāṃsam*’ (which is its reading for
‘*checcreṣṭham*’) as ‘one of the three higher castes—and ‘*antyajaḥ*’ as
the ‘Śūdra’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 146b).

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 100);—in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Vyavahāra, p. 288);—in *Aparārka* (p. 813), to the effect that the limb
should be cut off, if a, Śūdra causes pain to a Brāhmaṇa, or a Kṣatriya
or a Vaiśya;—and in *Mitākṣarā* (2.215), to the effect that if a Śūdra
causes pain to the Brāhmaṇa, or to the Kṣatriya, or to the Vaiśya, his
limb should be cut off; and adds that inasmuch as this lays down the
cutting of the limb of a Śūdra who strikes any *twice-born* person, it
follows, from the parity of reasoning, that this same punishment is to
be inflicted upon the Vaiśya striking the Kṣatriya. *Bālambhaṭṭī* has
the following notes:—‘*Śreyāṃsam*,’ higher caste, twice-born
caste,—‘*antyaja*,’ he who is born of the *lower-most* (‘*antya*’) limb,
or one born of the lowest caste,—*i.e*., the Śūdra. This same rule is
applicable also to the Vaiśya striking the Kṣatriya, as the former is
‘*antyaja*’ ‘low-born,’ in comparison with the latter, who therefore is
‘*śreyān*,’ ‘superior.’

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 44b);—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 75), which explains ‘*śreyāṃsam*’ (which
is its reading for ‘*śreṣṭham*’) as ‘the three higher castes,’ and
‘*antyaja*’ as ‘*Śūdra*.’


