+++
title = "292 छेदने चैव"

+++
**(verses 8.291-292)  
**

These verses are quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 863);—in *Mitākṣarā* (p. 299),
to the effect that the man is not liable to punishment as the damage is
not due to any act of his. *Bālambhaṭṭī* notes that under the ten
circumstances here enunciated, neither the owner nor the driver of the
chariot deserves any punishment;—the adjectives ‘*chinnanāsye*’ etc.,
refer to the bullocks or other animals yoked to the chariot,—the
‘*yuga*’ is a piece of wooden pole,—if the piece of wood inside the
wheel should happen to be broken on account of the unevenness of the
road,—if the ropes with which the several parts of the chariot are bound
should be snapped,—similarly on the snapping of the yoking-strap or the
reins,—the ‘*yoktra*’ being the yoking-strap with which the shaft is
tied to the back of the bullock,—the tenth circumstance is that when the
driver or some one in the chariot has been crying aloud ‘turn aside’;—if
under any of these ten circumstances, the chariot should happen to do
damage to any living being or to any property, the driver and the rest
are not liable to any punishment.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 281), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Chinnānasye*,’ the string connected with the nostrils
snapping,—‘*bhinnayuge*’, the wooden yoking-shaft breaking,—movement
caused by something coming up either sideways on in front, *i.e*., if by
reason of something else coming up sideways, or in front, the chariot
should be turned aside and thereby do damage, there is to be no
punishment,—‘*akṣa*’ is the piece of wood in the wheel (the
axle),—‘*yantrāṇām*’, the thongs with which the yoking shaft is tied
up,—‘*raśmi*’, the reins,—if the driver or some one else calls out
loudly ‘move off’, and yet disregarding the warning, some one comes too
near the chariot and becomes hurt, then the driver and others are not to
be punished.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 290), to the effect
that in a case where the hurt is caused by some one who is helpless in
the matter, he is not to be punished.


