+++
title = "320 धान्यन् दशभ्यः"

+++
‘*Kumbha*’—‘Equivalent to 20 or 22 *Prasthas* of 32 *Palas* each’
(Medhātithi);—‘to 2 *Droṇas* of 200 *Palas* each’ (Govindarājā, Kullūka
and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 513), where, Kātyāyana is
quoted as making ‘*kumbha*’ equivalent to 20 *droṇas*;—in *Aparārka* (p.
846), which has the following notes:—The *kumbha* is equivalent 52
*droṇas*;—‘*vadha’* is to be inflicted on the man who steals more than
20 *kumbhas* of paddy; in ‘other cases’—*i.e*., where the quantity
stolen is not large—the thief should be made to pay a fine which is
eleven times that which is prescribed for cases of stealing paddy (?);
and the quantity stolen has to be restored to the owner.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.275) as indicating the fact that the
penalty varies with the quantity of grain stolen; it adds the following
notes:—The *kumbha* is equal to 20 *droṇas*,—whether the ‘*vadha*’
prescribed here is to be *beating* or *mutilation* or *death* shall
depend upon (1) the qualities of the thief, of the corn stolen and of
the owner of the corn, and (2) upon the time, whether it is a time of
scarcity or plenty;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 151a), which
explains ‘*kumbha*’ as 10 *seers*, ‘*śeṣe*’ as ‘less than ten
kumbhas—‘*tasya*’ as ‘to the owner of the grain.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 311), which has the following
notes:—The *kumbha* consists of 10 *prasthas*,—‘*śeṣe*’, less than 10
*kumbhas*,—the property that had been stolen should be restored to the
owner.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 101), which explains ‘*kumbha*’
as 10 *prasthas*;—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 341), which says that
this refers to eases of serious crime.


