+++
title = "321 तथा धरिममेयानाम्"

+++
‘*Dharimameyānām suvarṇarajatādīnām*’—‘Articles weighed by scales such
as gold, silver, &c.,’ (Medhātithi; Govindarāja and Kullūka);—‘articles
measured by weight, *i*. *e*., copper and the rest, other than gold and
silver, *and* of gold, silver, &c.’ (Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 847), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Dharimameya*’ are those things that are measured by
scales,—*i.e*., ‘gold, silver and so forth’.—If the author had only the
expression ‘*suvarṇarajatādīnām*’, ‘gold, silver &c.,’ then iron and
other metals also would become included; similarly if he had only
‘*dharimameyānām*’ ‘things weighed by scales’, then molasses and such
other things also would become included; by having both, even such
articles as pearls, corals and the like, which also are ‘weighed by
scales,’ become included; these latter also belong to the same category
as ‘gold and silver’ by reason of their being highly valuable; the term
‘*ādi*’, means ‘and the like thus it is that such things as molasses,
even though they are ‘weighed by scales’, become excluded; because,
being cheap, they have no *similarity* to ‘gold and silver’; for the
same reason such cheap metals as iron, lead and so forth are not
included here,—‘*uttamāni vāsāṃsi*’, ‘excellent clothes’, clothes of
*patra*, (?) *ūrṇa* (wool), *netra* (?) *paṭī* (silk, and so forth).

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 102);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p.
323), which explains ‘*dharima*’ as ‘weight’;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī*
(p. 987);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 152a).


