+++
title = "325 गोषु ब्राह्मणसंस्थासु"

+++
‘*Kharikāyāśca bhedane*’—Medhātithi is misrepresented by Buhler.
Medhātithi’s reading is ‘*khārikāyāḥ*’ and the ‘*kharikā*’ he explains
as ‘*yayā gorakṣaiḥ kṣetrādau vāhyate balīvardaḥ*’, ‘that whereby the ox
is driven by the ox-keeper in the fields and other places’; so
apparently the *driving goad* is meant. Buhler has relied upon the
reading of Ms. 8, which reads the sentence as ‘*sthurikā yo
gorathakṣetrādiṣu vāhyate balīvardaḥ*’; this reading involves the
discrepancy of the feminine noun ‘*sthurikā*’ being taken as the ox;
which discrepancy need not be accepted in the face of the better reading
in the printed text (of Mandlik); ‘*bhedane*’ thus means ‘piercing’
(with the goad)—Kullūka and Rāghavānanda, reading ‘*churikā* and
‘*sthurikā*’ explain it as ‘the barren cow’ and ‘*bhedane*’ as piercing
of the nose;—Nārāyaṇa explains it as *the load of* *the ox*, and
‘*bhedane*’ as ‘cutting open and stealing’;—Nandana explains the word as
a particular spot on the back of the ox.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 319), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Sphurikā*’ (which is its reading for ‘*kharikā*’) is
the *barren cow*,—‘*bhedana*’ is ‘the piercing of the nose for purposes
of driving—‘*paśūnām*’, the animals meant here are all smaller animals
except the sheep, the cat and the mongoose;—and in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p.
135), which says that ‘*tūlikā*’ means ‘the nostrils’, and *bhedana*’
means ‘boring.’


