+++
title = "332 स्यात् साहसम्"

+++
‘*Ata eva sandhicchede* & c.’ (Medhātithi, p. 1069, l. 10)—See Manu
9.276.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 298), which
adds the following explanatory notes:—When the misappropriation of
other’s property is done openly by force, even in the presence of
watchmen and the king’s officers, then it is ‘*Sāhasa*’,
*robbery*,—‘theft’ consists in misappropriating secretly during absence,
or by fraud;—and when the man, after avoiding the king’s officers and
taking away the property, subsequently through fear, hides it, then also
it is a case of ‘theft.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 286), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Anvayavat*’ in the presence of the men guarding
it,—‘*prasabham*,’ by force;—*i.e*., it is ‘robbery’ when the
misappropriation is done without any attempt at
concealment;—‘*apavyayate*’ hides, denies;—wherever there is
misappropriation, it is ‘theft,’ which is of two kinds—(1) done in the
absence of watchmen, and (2) done even in the presence of the watchman,
but afterwards hidden.

The same work quotes it again on p. 350 where it adds the following
explanation:—When the property is taken away in the presence of the
watchman, this is what is called ‘*sānvaya apahāra*,’ which is
*robbery*, but where it is taken away in the absence of the watchman,
and then denied, it is *theft*.

It is quoted in ‘*Mitākṣārā*,’ (2.266), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Anvayavat*,’ in the presence of the guardians of the property,
the state officials and others,—‘*prasabham*,’ by force—where another’s
property is taken away—it is called ‘robbery different from this is
‘theft,’ which is ‘*niranvaya*’—*i.e*., done either in the absence of
the guardians of property and others, or through fraud;—and whenever the
act, though committed in the presence of these persons, is concealed
through fear, this also is ‘theft’ *Bālambhaṭṭī* has declared
‘*kṛtvāpavyayate ca yat*’ to be the generally accepted reading, and
explains it as ‘conceals.’

It is quoted in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 329), which explains ‘*anvayavat*’
as ‘before the owner’s eyes,’ and ‘*niranvayam*’ as ‘behind the owner’s
back’;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 150b), which adds the same
explanation and adds that even in cases of robbery, if the accused
denies the act in the court, it becomes a case of ‘theft.’


