+++
title = "338 ब्राह्मणस्य चतुःषष्टिः"

+++
**(verses 8.337-338)**

These verses are quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.275), in support of the view
that the fine imposed for theft should vary with the caste of the thief;
whereon *Bālambhaṭṭī* notes two different readings (see Note I);—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 302):—and in *Vivādaratnākara* (342),
which adds the following notes:—‘*Aṣṭāpādyam*’ means ‘multiplied eight
times,’—‘*kilviṣam*,’ the amount of fine imposed as punishment; the
meaning thus is that the fine to be imposed upon a *learned śūdra*
should be eight times that on an *ignorant śūdra*; similarly in the case
of the Vaiśya and others also;—for the Brāhmaṇa the fine is to be either
full one hundred, or twice 64;—the reason for this is
‘*taddoṣaguṇaviddhi saḥ*,’—‘because the Brāhmaṇa is fully cognisant of
the evil character of theft—thus the fact of the culprit being cognisant
of the evil being a ground for enhanced penalty in the case of the
Brāhmaṇa, the same principle is to be applied to the case of the Śūdra
and others also. That offence for which the legal penalty for the Śūdra,
is *one*, for the Vaiśya, the Kṣatriya and the Brāhmaṇa, it should be
double the amount of the preceding; so that the penalty for the
*ignorant* Śūdra being one, that of the *learned* Śūdra is *eight
times*—aṇd that of the learned Vaiśya 16, the learned Kṣatriya 32 and
the learned Brāhmaṇa 64 times.

These are quoted also in *Prāyaścittāviveka* (p, 348), which says that
all that is meant is to deprecate the act, and to show that the gravity
of the offence is in proportion to the caste of the delinquent;—it
explains ‘*aṣṭāpādyam*’ as ‘that which is multiplied by *eight*;
*aṣṭābhiḥ āpadyate guṇyate iti*,’—the single unit being meant for those
lower than the Śūdra;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 144), which attributes
them to Yājñavalkya, and says that ‘*taddoṣaguṇavit*’ is to be construed
all through; so that the meaning is that the fine in the case of the
Śūdra who is cognisant of the seriousness of the offence is to be eight
times that of the ignorant man, and so on, the fine varying with the
qualifications of the offender.


