+++
title = "362 नैष चारणदारेषु"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 387), which adds the
following notes:—In the case of the wives of *Cāraṇas* and other people
of that class, and also in that of the wives of those who make a living
by ‘their own’ (wife’s beauty),—the aforesaid rule prohibiting
conversation, or that prescribing the punishment for conversing, does
not apply,—because it is the business of these people to help their
wives to come in contact with other men, and themselves to bring about
their intercourse in secret.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.285), where *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the
following notes:—‘The said rule is not applicable to cases where
conversation is held with the wives of actors, singers and people of
that class who make a living by the beauty of their own (wives), *i.e*.,
those who permit other men to have intercourse with their *wives*,—the
wife being called ‘*ātman*,’ in accordance with the dictum that ‘the
wife and son of a man are his very *self*,’—‘for the purpose of making
money, and help their wives to meet other men, and even connive
secretly—showing as if they did not see it—at other men coming to their
wives.’

It is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (p. 174), which has the following
notes:—‘*Cāraṇa*,’ dancer,—‘*ātmopajīvin*’ is the professional actor,
who makes a living by his ‘*ātman*,’ *i.e*., his *wife*,—these two
clashes of men deck up their wives for the purpose of entrapping young
men, and hence conversation with their wives is not to be penalised,
though intercourse with these also is to be punished;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 156a).


