+++
title = "402 पञ्चरात्रे पञ्चरात्रे"

+++
Buhler is not right in saying that ‘Medhātithi omits this and the next
four verses’—(See *Translation*).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 301), where it is remarked
that the prices should be settled every fortnight for such commodities
as take a long time to dispose of, and every five days for those that
are disposed of quickly.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 315), which adds the
following notes:—In the case of country-produces which are disposed of
the same day, he should fix the profit at 5 per cent; and in that of
foreign products disposed of the same day, 10 per cent; in the case of
commodities which take sometime in being disposed of, the amount of
profit is to be fixed in accordance with the time likely to be taken in
their disposal; and in the case of commodities imported from foreign
countries, the cost of the journey both ways, of the customs and other
duties paid, should be totalled up and added to the price paid, and upon
this the prices should be so fixed that the trader makes a profit of 10
per cent on the total outlay. In short the king shall so fix the prices
that the interests of neither the consumer nor the supplier may suffer.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 827);—and in *Mitākṣarā* (2.251), where
*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the following notes:—For commodities that cannot keep
long, every five days, for those that can keep a little longer, every
fortnight, and for those that can keep much longer, every month,—the
king should have the prices fixed by trustworthy officers in the
presence of himself as also of the expert merchants;—what the repetition
(‘*pañcarātre pañcarātre*’) means is that the prices are to be fixed
after five days or ‘after a fortnight’, &c., always throughout the
king’s life.


