+++
title = "001 मनुम् एकाग्रम्"

+++
‘*Pratipūjya*’—has been taken by Kullūka to mean also after mutual
salutations’; and be has taken ‘*yathānyāyam*’ with ‘*abravīt*.’
Sarvajñanārāyaṇa takes it to mean ‘*pratyekam pūjayitvā*’, having
honoured them severally’.

*Medhātithi* (p. 1, 1. 18) curiously ascribes the assertion ‘*atha
śabdānuśāsanam*’ to Pāṇini, not to Patañjali.

P. 2, 1. 4—appears to favour the *Prābhākara* view in regard to the
*Śastrārambha* (vide *Prabhākara-Mīmāṃsa*). But on p. 73, 1. 20, the
*Bhāṭṭa* view is also accepted.

P. 2, 1. 12.—‘Whatever Manu said &c.,’—This text occurs in several
Saṃhitas in varying forms, where it refers to the secred (sacred?) texts
‘seen’ by Manu. But there is nothing to prevent the deduction being
drawn that tins declaration proves the antiquity of the ‘Law of Manu’,
though it need not be exactly in the form in which it has been handed
down to us by Bhṛgu and his pupils.

P. 2, 1. 13.—‘Manu has said &c.’—“*ṛco yajūṃṣi*” &c.—The second half of
this verse is quoted by Bidder (XIV) as “*maharṣibhistu tatproktaṃ
smārtaṃ tu manurabravīt*”, and translated as ‘the Vedas were proclaimed
by the great sages, but the *Smārta*, or traditional lore, by Manu.’ It
is strange that Buhler did not notice that such a statement as this
would not add very much to Manu’s claims to exceptional honour. The
right reading of the verse is, as we find in the printed texts of
Medhātithi, *saptarṣibhistu yatproktaṃ tu(?) sarvammanurabravīt*,’ ‘the
Ṛk verses......... and all that has been declared by the seven
sages,—all this has Manu expounded’. This would mean that the work of
Manu contains all the teachings that had gone before him.

P. 3, 1. 11.—‘Having paid their respects’, &c.—*pratipūjyā
yathānyāyam*—The commentaries on this expression throw a curious light
on their own relative antiquity: Medhātithi explains it simply
as—*yādṛśī śāstreṇābhivādanopāsanādikā guroḥ prathamopasarpaṇe pūjā
vihitā tathā pūjayitvā*—and he does not seek to Emphasise and explain
the anomaly involved in the teacher being a ‘Kṣatriya’ and the
questioners ‘Brāhmaṇas’, and the latter offering *pūjā* to the former.
Kullūka has tried to tone down the anomaly by explaining *pratipūjya* as
*pūjitāḥ santaḥ pūjāṃ kṛtvā*—‘They offered the *pūjā* after they had
themselves received the *pūjā* due to themselves;’ and Rāghavānanda goes
a step farther and explains as *yathānyāyam* as “*nyāpo'tra kṣatriyeṣu
brāhmaṇādīnāṃ na namaskāraḥ kintu vākapūjā* \|”

P. 3, 1. 13.—‘*The word ṛṣi means the Veda*’—The word ‘*ṛṣi*’ is
explained by Medhātithi as a synonym for the *Veda*, and in his Bhāṣya
on verse 11 below he actually uses the word in that sense. According to
him the term *primarily* denotes the *Veda*, and only *secondarily the
person who possesses special knowledge of the Veda*.

P. 2, l. 23—‘*Dharmaśabdaśca*—This is a paraphrase of Jaimini’s
definition *codanālakṣaṇo'rtho dharmaḥ*
