+++
title = "002 भगवन् सर्ववर्णानाम्"

+++
‘O blessed one,’ *bhagavan*—The title *bhagavān* means ‘one who
possesses *Bhaga*.’ What ‘*bhaga*’ stands for is thus described in the
Viṣṇupurāṇa quoted by Kullūka—‘*Bhaga* is the name for the following
six—(1) full sovereignty, (2) strength, (3) fame, (4) glory, (5)
knowledge and (6) freedom from passion.’

‘Intermediate castes,’ *antaraprabhavān*—This refers to the ‘mixed
castes’ described under Discourse 10.

P. 3, l. 24—For *manuḥ* J reads *manoḥ* which would be construed with
*sambodhanam*.

P. 3, l. 25—for *jñātiṣu* (l. 25) J and Mand. lightly read *jātiṣu*.

P. 4, l. 3—Those castes being similar &c. *sadṛśāneva tānāhu*:—This is
Manu, 10. 6, where Medhātithi says—*te sadṛśā eva jñeyāḥ,
natajjātīyāḥ......tatsadṛśagrahaṇāt mātṛta utkṛṣṭāḥ pitṛto
nikṛṣṭāḥ*—‘They should he regarded as *equal to*, not of the same caste
as, their fathers; what is meant is that they are superior to the
mother, but inferior to the father.’

P. 4, l. 14—‘In another work,’ *granthāntare*—Does this refer to the
author’s *Smṛtiviveka* from which he has quoted in his comments on 2. 6
below?

Medhātithi does not attach much importance to the account of creation
here provided. In more than one place he says that the whole of Adhyāya
I is ‘mere *Arthavāda*.’ In his comments on verse 5, for instance, he
says that the process described is in some places in accordance with the
account found in the Purāṇas, and in others, in accordance with the
tenets of the Sāṅkhya system of philosophy; and that no attention need
be paid to this, as it has no direct bearing upon *Dharma*. Again under
verse 9, he says that as this subject does not form the real
subject-matter of the treatise, no attention need he paid to what the
author says on it.
