+++
title = "015 महान्तम् एव"

+++
**(verse xiv-xv)**

The confusion regarding the account of the process of creation contained
in Manu is best exemplified by these two verses. The names of the
various evolutes have been so promiscuously used, that the commentators
have been led to have recourse to various forced interpretations, with a
view to bring the statement herein contained into line with their own
philosophical predilections. Medhātithi, Kullūka, Govinda and
Rāghavānanda take it as describing the three principles of the
Sāṅkhya—Mahat, Ahaṅkāra and Manas; but finding that the production of
Ahaṅkāra from Manas, or of Mahat (which is what they understand by the
term ‘*mahāntam ātmānam*’) is not in conformity with the Sāṅkhya
doctrine,—they assert that the three evolutes have been mentioned here
‘in the inverted order’. Even, so, how they can get over the statement
that ‘Ahaṅkāra’ was produced ‘from Manas’ (‘manasaḥ’) it is not easy to
see. Similarly, the ‘ātman’ from which Manas is described as being
produced, Medhātithi explains as the Sāṅkhya ‘Pradhāna’, and Kullūka as
the Vedantic¹ Supreme Soul’.

Buhler remarks that according to Medhātithi by the particle ‘*ca*’ ‘the
subtile elements alone are to he understood.’

This does not represent Medhātithi correctly; his words
being—‘*caśabdena viṣayāṃśca śabdasparśarūparasagandhān pṛthivyādīni
ca*’.

In order to escape from the above difficulties, Nandana has recourse to
another method of interpretation,—no less forced than the former. He
takes ‘*manas*’ as standing for Mahat, and ‘*mahāntam ātmānam*’ as the
Manas.

Not satisfied with all this, Nandana remarks that the two verses are not
meant to provide an accurate account of the precise order of creation;
all that is meant to be shown is that all things were produced out of
parts of the body of the Creator himself.
