+++
title = "055 तमो ऽयम्"

+++
Under this verse Hopkins translates a passage from Medhātithi, which, as
will be clear from the text, has been entirely misunderstood and hence
wrongly rendered.

Verses 55 and 56 have been variously interpreted. (1) According to
Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Kullūka, it describes the process of
transmigration. When an individual is dying, his individual Soul enters
darkness,—*i.e*. becomes unconscious; and even though It continues to be
connected with the dying body, the physical functions gradually
cease;—then It leaves the body,—and enveloped in a subtle body—formed of
the eight constituents (variously enumerated), It enters the embryo
determined for It by its own past acts, and there becomes clothed with a
new physical body which accompanies It through Its next life on Earth.
(2) Nārāyaṇa holds that verse 55 provides the description of the soul
during a swoon, and the second alone refers to the method of
transmigration. (3) The explanation given by Nandana is entirely
different. He; takes the verses as referring to what is done by the
Supreme Being, the Creator;—verse 55 describing His action during
Dissolution and 56 referring to a fresh creation following it. The
Supreme Lord ‘enters darkness—*i.e*. the *Pradhāna*,—and having remained
therein during the entire period of the Dissolution, becomes endowed
with organs and a visible shape,—*i*. *e*., the shape of the Created
Universe.’
