+++
title = "023 वाच्य् एके"

+++
**(verses 4.23-24)  
**

*Kauṣītaki-Brāhmaṇa*.—‘While the man breathes, he does not speak; at
that time he offers speech unto breath; while he speaks, he does not
breathe; then ho offers breath unto speech; these two arc the endless
oblations, offered during sleep as also during waking hours;—other
oblations are an end; those that consist of acts. In this manner have
the Ancient Sages offered the Agnihotra-oblations.’

*Mahābhārata* (Bhagavadgītā, 6.25-333).—‘The Yogins have recourse to a
different sacrifice, the Daiva sacrifice; other Yogins have recourse to
another sacrifice offered into the fire of Brahman. Others again offer
the auditory and other organs into the fire of Restraint; others offer
sound and the other objects into the fire of the sense-organs. Others
offer all sense-functions and breath-functions into the fire of the Yoga
of self-restraint, enkindled by wisdom. Sages fixed in their observances
offer the sacrifice of substances, the sacrifice of austerities, the
sacrifice of Yoga, the sacrifice of Vedic Study and the sacrifice of
Knowledge. They offer the Prāṇa unto the Apāṇa, and the Apāṇa unto
Prāṇa; and restraining the function of Prāṇa and Apāṇa, devoted to
breath-control, restrained in their food, they offer Prāṇa unto the
Prāṇas. All these are persons well-versed in sacrifices and have their
sins destroyed by sacrifices. O Suppressor of enemies, the sacrifice of
knowledge is superior to the sacrifice of substances; all action, O
Pārtha, culminates in knowledge.’
