+++
title = "029 आसनाशन-शय्याभिर् अद्भिर्"

+++
*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2.21.1).—‘In the absence of all else, a place,
water, agreeable speech,—at least these should not fail towards one who
resides in his house; one should eat what has been left by the guests;
no such sweet dishes should one eat in his house as have not been
partaken of by the guest.’

*Viṣṇu* (59.26-27).—‘Though breathing, he does not live who makes no
offerings to gods, guests, dependents, Pitṛs and his own self. The
Religious Student, the Renunciate and the Hermit derive their sustenance
from the Householder; hence when these happen to arrive at one’s house,
he shall not disregard them.’

Do. (67.30, 40, 42, 43).—‘One shall not permit a guest to live in the
house without feeding him. The foolish man who eats food without
offering it to these knows not that he is himself being devoured by dogs
and vultures. After that the husband and wife shall eat what remains.
The Householder shall eat what is left after offerings have been made to
gods, Pitṛs, men, dependents and the household-deities. The food
prescribed for the good consists in the remnant of the sacrificial
offering.’

Do. (67.32-33).—‘Never without having given; never without pouring the
oblation into fire.’

*Mahābhārata* (12.249.5, 7, 12, 13).—‘One shall not have food cooked for
himself alone; one shall not needlessly kill animals;—no Brāhmaṇa should
reside in his house, without being honoured and fed. He shall always
feed upon *Vighasa* and upon *Amṛta—Amṛta* being the remnant of
sacrifices; and the eating of it is like the eating of sacrificial food.
He who eats what has been left after all dependents have been fed is
said to *feed on Vighasa*.’
