+++
title = "045 नाऽन्नम् अद्याद्"

+++
**(verses 4.45-49)  
**

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 35).—‘Pools, tanks, streams, hills,
cowdung, ashes, ploughed fields,—these he shall avoid; as also chaff,
fire-embers, potsherds, temples, public roads, cremation-ground, fields
and harvesting enclosures; he shall not do it in a shady place, or on a
visible road-crossing, or on beautiful spots; water, proximity of water,
path, tree-bases, worshipped trees and holes,—these he shall avoid.

*Brhannāradīya* (Do., p. 37).—‘On the road, in the cowpen, on
river-bank, in a tank, near a wall, under the shade of trees, in a
forest, near the fire, near Brāhmaṇas, cows, or elderly women,—one shall
not pass stool or urine.’

*Gautama* (9.45.13).—Not on ashes, nor on dry cowdung, nor on cultivated
ground. He shall not pass urine or excreta or throw any impure things,
while looking towards the wind, the fire, the Brāhmaṇa, the water,
deities or cows.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, pp. 35 and 38).—‘Not near a garden,
or a water-reservoir, or on barren ground, or on ground rendered unclean
by others; nor with shoes or sandals on; nor with umbrella, nor in the
sky nor facing women, or elders, or Brāhmaṇas, or cows, or temples, or
deities, or stars, or the wind.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (11).—‘Urination should not be done in a river; nor on ashes,
nor on cowdung, nor in ploughed fields, nor in fields sown with seed,
nor on grass.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 35).—‘He shall not pass urine or
stool either in the public square or near the side-gate; nor in a
tīrtha, or sacrificial ground, or under sacrificial trees.’

*Baudhāyana* (3.2.44).—‘He shall not bathe naked.’

*Viṣṇu* (60.11).—‘Not on the road, nor on ashes, nor in haunts of cows.’

*Viṣṇu* (Aparārka, p. 180).—‘He shall not pass urine or stool on barren
ground; nor near a garden or a water-reservoir; nor in the sky.’

*Viṣṇu* (64.5).—‘Nor naked (shall he bathe).’

*Viṣṇu* (68.14).—‘Nor with a single cloth.’

*Viṣṇu* (60.4-22).—‘\[He shall not urinate or pass stool) on ploughed
ground; nor under a shadow; nor on barren ground; nor on grass; nor
where there are living creatures; nor in a hole; nor on an ant-hill, nor
on the road; nor on the lane; nor in a garden; nor near a garden or a
water-reservoir; nor on ashes; nor on fire-embers; nor on cowdung; nor
in places haunted by cows; nor in the sky; nor in water; nor before the
wind, the fire, the moon, the sun, a woman, the preceptor or the
Brāhmaṇa.’

*Viṣṇupurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 36).—‘One shall never urinate in
one’s own shadow, or in the shade of a tree, or facing the cow, the sun,
fire, wind, elders or twice-born men.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (1.30.18).—‘One shall not urinate or pass stool
with shoes on;—nor on ploughed ground, nor on the path, nor in water.
Spitting and sexual intercourse also should be avoided in water. He
shall avoid urinating and passing of stool in the presence of fire, the
sun, water, Brāhmaṇas, cows, or deities.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 36).—‘He shall avoid
the passing of urine and stool under the shade.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.131).—‘He shall not eat within sight of his wife, nor
with a single cloth, nor standing.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.134).—‘He shall not urinate in a river, or under shade,
or on the path, or in water, or on ashes; nor before the fire, or the
sun, or the cow, or the moon, or water, or twice-born men.’

*Śāṅkhāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 38).—‘Not facing the
sun, nor with knees towards the sun.’

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (3.9.6).—‘He shall not bathe during the night;
he shall not bathe naked; he shall not sleep naked; he shall not look at
a naked woman, except... he shall not run while it is raining.’

*Pāraskara* (2.7.6).—‘Looking at sunrise, tree-climbing,
fruit-gathering, naked bathing,...... these he shall not do;—nor shall
he beg for food after bathing.’

Do. (2.7.15).—‘He shall not urinate or pass stool on fertile ground, or
on bare ground, or while walking or standing.’

*Śaṅkha*.—‘One shall not urinate either on cowdung or on ploughed
ground, or in a sown field, or on grass, or on ṭhe cremation-ground, or
on an ant-hill, or on the path, or in a place where grains are husked,
or in a place where cattle congregate, or in a hole, or on a hill, or on
a sandbank;—since all these are the receptacles of living beings.’

Do. (p. 180).—‘he shall not urinate facing the sun; those who do it,
facing the sun or the wind or the cow or the Brāhmaṇas, or the moon, or
the water or the twilights or the public road, lose their intelligence
and become short-lived.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘One shall not pass urine or stool on road-crossings and
side-gates, nor in ploughed fields, nor in a field with standing corns,
nor in sacrificial ground, nor under sacrificial trees.’

*Śaṅkha-Likhita* (Do., p. 180).—‘He shall not pass urine or stool in an
uncovered place; nor with his lower garment on, nor naked.’
