+++
title = "050 मूत्रोच्चार-समुत्सर्गन् दिवा"

+++
**(verses 4.50-51)  
**

*Bṛhannāradīya* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 28).—‘During the day and the
twilights, facing the north, at night, facing the south, he shall pass
urine and stool.’

*Gautama* (9.38).—‘Urination and stooling \[Should be done with body
covered\].’

*Baudhāyana* (1.5.68).—‘Placing on the ground dry grass, or wood which
is not sacrificial, or earth-clod,—facing the north during the day and
the south during the night,—and covering his head,—he shall urinate and
pass stool.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (1.30.14-15).—‘During the day, covering of the
head should he avoided, except during urination and stooling. Urination
and stooling shall he done with covered head and after placing something
on the ground.’

Do. (1.31.1).—‘Facing the east, he shall eat food; facing the south, he
shall pass it out; facing the north, he shall urinate; facing the west,
he shall wash his feet.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (12-10).—‘With head wrapped up, placing on the ground such
grass as is not sacrificial, he shall urinate and pass stool.’

Do. (6.10).—‘Both urinating and stooling he shall dofacing the north
during the day; and the south during the night. Thus is life not cut
short.’

*Viṣṇu* (60.1, 3, 23).—‘Rising at the Brahmic moment, he shall go to
stool and urinate; hut not on uncovered ground, nor with head
uncovered.’

Do. (60.2).—‘Facing the south at night, and the north in the day and at
the twilights.’

*Pāraskara* (2.7.15).—‘On fertile ground, covered over, one shall
urinate and stooling but not walking or standing.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 25).—Covering the mouth and the
nostrils with cloth, he shall pass stool.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.16).—‘During the day, and at the twilights one shall
perform urination and stooling with the sacred thread resting on his
ears—facing the north; but at night, facing the south.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 34).—‘The passing of urine and Stool should be done
with head covered, covering the ground with such grass as are not sacred
or wet; facing the west in the forenoon, and the east in the afternoon,
and the south at night.’

*Aṅgiras* (Aparārka, p. 34).—‘Covering the ground with grass, and
covering his head with cloth, with speech in check, avoiding spitting
and breathing one shall pass urine and stool on a clear spot.’

*Vāyupurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, 25)—‘Covering the ground with dry
grass or wood or leaves or split bamboo or earthen vessels.’
