+++
title = "053 नाऽग्निम् मुखेनोपधमेन्"

+++
*Gautama* (9.33).—‘Blowing fire with the mouth, wrangling, obtrusive
wearing of garlands and sandal-paste, eating with his wife, looking at
the wife applying collyrium to her eyes, entering by the wrong door,
eating while seated on the chair, swimming in the river, climbing
trees,—these he shall avoid.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (15.20).—‘He shall not blow (the fire,
carelessly).’

Do. (30.20).—‘He shall not stretch his legs towards fire, water,
Brahmaṇas, Deities, wind.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (12.27).—‘He shall not blow the fire with his mouth.’

*Viṣṇu* (72.26.37).—‘He shall not look at the naked woman,—he shall not
throw any unclean object into the fire,—he shall not warm his feet over
the fire.’

Do. (Aparārka, p. 182).—‘Blood or poison he shall not throw into the
fire.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.135).—‘He shall not look at the sun, nor at the naked
woman, nor at the woman immediately after intercourse, nor at the urine
or at the stool, nor at unclean things, nor at the eclipse or at the
stars.’

*Yajñavalkya* (1.137).—‘He shall not throw into the water spittings or
blood, or ordure or urine or semen; he shall not warm his feet over the
fire; nor shall he cross over it.’

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (3.9.6).—‘He shall not bathe at night; he shall
not bathe naked; he shall not sleep naked; he shall not look at ṭhe
naked woman, except...... he shall not run in the rain.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 181).—‘The worshipping tree one shall not cut; nor
throw phlegm, semen, poison, urine, ordure, blood, bones, ashes,
potsherds, hair or thorns into water.’

*Kātyāyana* (Do.).—‘Either before or after the offering of oblations one
shall not blow the fire with the hand, or with the winnowing basket or
with the *sphya* or fans. He shall blow the fire with the mouth alone,
as from the mouth was fire born; the prohibition of blowing fire with
the mouth is applied to the ordinary (not sacrificial) fire.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘One shall not throw fire into the fire, nor quench it
with water.’
