+++
title = "095 श्रावण्याम् प्रौष्ठपद्याम्"

+++
*Gautama* (16.1-2).—‘Having performed the annual *Upākarma* on the
fullmoon day of either Śrāvaṇa or Bhādra, he shall study the Vedas for
four months and a half, or throughout the *Southern Path* of the Sun.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.6.143).—‘Having performed the Upākarma on the fullmoon
day of either Śrāvaṇa or Bhādra or Āṣādha, he shall perform the
*Utsarjana* on the fullmoon day of either Pauṣa or Māgha.’

*Āpastamba* (1.9.1-3).—‘On the fullmoon day of either Śrāvaṇa or Bhādra,
having performed the *Upākarma* of Vedic Study, he shall not study at
night for one month. He shall stop the study on the fullmoon day of
either Pauṣa or Mārgaśīrṣa. According to some people, the study has to
be carried on for four months and a half.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (13.1-5).—‘Next proceeds the Upākarma of Vedic Study: On the
fullmoon day of either Śrāvaṇa or Bhādra, having kindled the fire and
performed the rites of fire-laying, he pours oblations into it to Gods,
Ṛṣis and the Vedas. Having made the Brāhmaṇas pronounce the benedictory
syllable *Svasti*, he shall eat curd and then *start* the Vedic Study,
and continue it for four and a half or five and a half months. After
that he is to study the Veda only during the brighter fortnight; but the
subsidiary sciences, he may read whenever he likes.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 519).—‘On the fullmoon day of Śrāvaṇa
or Āśāḍha or Bhādra has the performance of Upākarma been prescribed.’

*Viṣṇu* (30.1).—‘Having performed the *Upākarma* on the fullmoon day of
either Śrāvaṇa or Bhādra, he shall study for four months and a half.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.142).—‘He shall perform the *Upākarma* of the Vedas on
the appearance of herbs, either on the fullmoon day of Śrāvaṇa or on a
day in Śrāvaṇa under the asterism of Śravaṇā, or on the fifth day of
Śravaṇā under the asterism of Hastā.’

*Āśvalāyāna Gṛhyasūtrā* (3.5.1-4).—‘Next comes the Upākaraṇa of the
Veda:—on the appearance of herbs, on that day of the month of Śrāvaṇa
which falls under the asterism of Śravaṇā;—or on the fifth day, under
the asterism of Hastā;—and he shall carry on the study for six months.’

*Pāraskara* (2.10.1-2).—‘Next comes the Upākarma of the Veda. On the
appearance of herbs, on the fullmoon day of the month of Śrāvaṇa, under
the asterism of Śravaṇā, or on the fifth day under the asterism of
Hastā.’

Do. (II. 10-11).—‘Having carried on the study for five months and a half
they should perform the *Utsarjana*; or after having studied for ten
months and a half.’

*Gobhila* (3.3.1, 13)—‘The *Upākaraṇa* is to he done oṇ the fullmoon day
of Bhādra under the asterism of Hastā;—according to others under the
asterism of Śravaṇā.’

Do. (Parāśaramādhava, p. 519).—‘The Taittirīyakas perform the Upākarma
on the fullmoon day of Śrāvaṇa when it occurs after the fore-noon; the
Ṛgvedis do it on the asterism of Śravaṇā.’

*Pracetas* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 497).—‘The Upākarma should be
performed in the fore-noon on the fullmoon day.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Do., p. 500).—‘During the month of Śrāvaṇa, on the
Śravaṇā asterism; on the fullmoon day of Śrāvaṇa, on the fifth day under
the asterism of Hastā, the prescribed *Upākarma* should be performed.’

*Śāṅkhyāyana* (Do., p. 500).—‘Next the Upākaraṇa—on the appearance of
herbs, under the asterism of Hastā or Śravaṇā.’

*Hiraṇyakeśin* (Do., p. 501).—‘Next we describe the Upākarma and the
Utsarjana—during Śrāvaṇa, on the appearance of herbs, or on the fullmoon
day under the asterism of Hastā, the Upākarma should be performed.’

*Maitra-Sūtra* (Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra, p. 502).—‘During the rains,
under the asterism of Śravaṇā, he performs the Upākarma of the Veda.’

*Khādira-Sūtra* (Do., p. 503).—‘They perform the Upākarma of the Veda on
the fullmoon day of Bhādra, under the asterism of Hastā.’
