+++
title = "103 विद्युत्-स्तनित-वर्षेषु महोल्कानाम्"

+++
**(verses 4.103-104)  
**

*Gautama* (16.10, 15, 16, 22-23).—‘When clouds are seen out of
season,—when there is untimely thunder, earthquake, eclipse or
meteors,—also when there are ominous rumblings, rain or lightning, after
the fires have been lighted,—when there are halos round the teacher or
the sun or the moon.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.24).—‘When there are thunder, rain and lightning,
three days become unlit for study, except during the annual rains.’

*Viṣṇu* (30.8.9).—‘Not when there is untimely rain, lightning and
thunder; nor when there is earthquake, meteor-fall or fiery quarters.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (13.9).—‘When meteors and lightning appear together, three
days are unfit for study.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.145).—‘When there is thunder during the twilights, or
ominous rumblings, earthquake or fall of meteors, he shall stop the
reading of the Veda, and proceed to read the Āraṇyaka texts.’

*Pāraskara* (1.11.2).—‘When he has eaten at the Śrāddha, when there is
fall of meteors, thunder, earthquake, or fiery portents, and at the
juncture of the seasons,—till the same time next day.’

*Gobhila* (3.3.17-19).—‘When there is lightning, thunder or rain,—then,
till the same time next day; also when there is fall of meteors,
earthquake or collision of planets; as also when there are ominous
rumblings.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (1.11.27, 28, 31).—‘On the simultaneous
appearance of lightning, thunder and rain, out of season, three days
shall he regarded as unfit for study; only till such time as rain-water
remains on the ground, say some; if there are untimely clouds, if there
are halos round the sun or the moon, if the rainbow appears, or when
there is a rotting smell in the wind,—so long as these last, it will be
unfit for study.’
