+++
title = "113 नीहारे बाणशब्दे"

+++
*Vaśiṣṭha* (13.8).—\[See above.\]

*Gautama* (16.7, 12, 35).—‘While the sounds of arrows and the drum or
the chariot or of weeping are heard,—or during the night or during
twilights or in water;—or on the moonless day.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.22, 23, 35).—‘On the full-moon day, on the Aṣṭakā
days, on the moonless day, when there are fiery portents, or earthquake,
in the cremation-ground, on the death of the country’s king or of a
Vedic scholar, or of one’s fellow-studenṭ,—it shall be unfit for study
for the day and night. When there is rotting smell in the air, during a
fog, while sounds are heard of dancing or singing or musical instruments
or weeping or Sāma-singing,—it will be unfit for study while they last.
One should not study at the junction of day and night.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (1.9.28).—‘For the whole day and night on the
moonless days.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (1.11.15, 25).—‘When there is lightning-flash or
thunder,...... during a fog.’

*Viṣṇu* (30, 4).—‘One shall not study during the day and night on the
fourteenth and eighth days of the month.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.146, 148, 150).—‘On the full-moon day, on the moonless
day and on the eighth of the month, when there is an. eclipse, at the
junction of the seasons, when one Ins either eaten or received gifts at
a Śrāddha; when sounds are heard of the dog, the jackal, the ass or the
owl, or of Sāma-singing, or of arrows; in the proximity of unclean
things, or of a dead body, or of a Śūdra or a Caṇḍāla or an outcast;
when there is rain of dust, or a burning of the quarters, during
twilights, during a fog, or when there is danger, while one is running,
when there is rotting smell, or when a highly cultured gentleman has
arrived as guest.’

*Pāraskara* (l.11.1, 4, 6).—‘During a storm and on the moonless day, the
whole day is unfit for study; after meals while his hands are wet, in
water, during the night, during the twilights, while a corpse is lying
in the village or when a Caṇḍāla is in the village; during a fog, when
there is sound of musical instruments, or of distressful weeping, in the
outskirts of the village, in the cremation-ground, while sounds are
heard of the dog, the ass, the owl, or the jackal, or of
Sāma-singing,—it will be unfit for study while it lasts.’

*Gobhila* (3.3.11, 22).—‘On the full-moon days, or the three full moon
days of the months of Kārtika, Phālguna and Āṣāḍha.’
