+++
title = "145 मङ्गलाचारयुक्तः स्यात्"

+++
*Vyāsa* (quoted by Gautama).—‘One shall do what is commended, and avoid
what is not commended; this is what has been declared by sages to he the
*auspicious custom*.’

*Gautama* (10, 71).—‘The accomplished student, who, desirous of saving
from evil his parents and relations, senior as well as junior, behaves
in this manner, never falls off from the eternal Brahman.’

*Atri-Saṃhitā* (16-19).—‘This Dharma has been expounded by men for the
religious students, when by having acquired honour in this world, they
reach the highest conditions. Those who, deviating from their own
Dharma, betake themselves to that of others, them the king shall punish,
and thereby rejoice in heaven. he who is linn in his own Dharma, even if
he he a Śūdra, obtains heaven; the Dharma of others should be always
shunned, like the beautiful wife of another man.’

*Āpastamba Dharmasūtra* (2.2.27).—‘For all castes, there is high and
immeasurable happiness in the performance of their own Dharma. On
re-birth, by virtue of the residue of his *Karma*, he acquires his
caste, body, complexion, strength, memory, intelligence, riches and
meritorious behaviour.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.2.1).—‘The Brāhmaṇa who bathes daily, constantly wears
the sacred thread, reads the Veda daily, avoids the Śūdra’s food,
approaches his wife only during

the period and offers oblations according to law, never falls off from
the Brāhmic region.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.205).—‘Even the Householder becomes liberated, if he
has acquired property rightfully, has been devoted to truth and fond of
guests, has performed Śrāddhas and has always spoken the truth.’

Do. (3. 220).—‘By omitting what has been enjoined, by doing what has
been forbidden, and by omitting to control the sense-organs, the man
falls.’
