+++
title = "226 श्रद्धयेष्टञ् च"

+++
*Baudhāyana* (1.5.62, 64).—‘The gods, ever bent upon purity, loath the
offerings of the faithless, and never accept them. In connection with
this they quote the following—Faithlessness is the worst sin, Faith is
the highest penance; therefore the gods do not eat what is offered
without faith.’

*Mahābhārata* (Śānti., 270. 6, 7, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21).—‘An
action involving injury to living beings destroys faith here as also
elsewhere; and O Brahman, Faith, being destroyed, destroys the man.—A
sacrifice is a sacrifice only when it is performed by men who are calm,
imbued with faith, self-controlled and high-minded, not otherwise.—One
should eat food offered by the generous man, never that offered by the
miser or the woman.—The faithless man does not deserve to make offerings
to gods; his food should never be eaten; so have declared persons versed
in law.—Faithlessness is the worst sin; Faith is destructive of sin; the
man imbued with faith casts off sin, just as the serpent casts off its
skin, etc.’

*Mahābhārata* (Aparārka, p. 290).—‘The one-fìre Rite, the offerings into
the three fires, the gifts given within the altar—these are called
*Iṣṭa*. Wells, tanks, ponds, temples, food-stalls, public gardens—the
building of these is called *Pūrta*.’

*Nārada* (Do.).—‘Receiving guests and Vaiśvadeva-offerings are called
Iṣṭa. Tanks, ponds, temples, food-stalls, gardens, gifts made during
eclipses, and on the day of the sun passing from one sign into another,
and on the twelfth day of the fortnight,—these constitute *Pūrta*.’
