+++
title = "007 यद्-भक्ष्यं स्याद्"

+++
It has been said that ‘food fit for hermits’ should be used; this
consists of wild grains, such as *Nīvāra* and the rest, and of
wild-growing herbs, etc. The term ‘*anna*’, ‘food’, is generally used in
the sense of some *preparation of grains*,— such as rice, fried flour,
cake and so forth; and it is for this reason that, though herbs, &c.,
also are ‘food fit for hermits’, they have been mentioned separately.
‘Hermits’ are ascetics, and their food is called ‘food fit for hermits.’
And what is meant (by verse 5) is that the man should perform the Five
Sacrifices, which are duties related to cooking on the household fire.
This might give rise to the notion that when the man lives upon ripe
season-fruits (and does not cook his food) he should not offer the said
sacrifices: it is with a view to preclude such a notion that the Text
adds—‘*what he eats*’; the meaning is that whatever, in the shape of
flour, &.c., be eats, that he should offer to the best of his capacity.

‘*Offerings*’— apart for the Agnihotra-libations; those that are laid
down as to be made.to ‘*Indra*’ ‘*Indrapuruṣa*’ and so forth.

In this view, there are no offerings poured into the fire,—they say.

But this is not right; as the term ‘*bali*’, ‘offering’, is a generic
name for all kinds of oblations; and hence it stands equally for those
offered into the fire, and those not offered Into the fire.

If the right view to hike were this that⁽one shall offer only what he
eats;—and that also into the file only,—and that offerings into the fire
must consist of *cooked* food then the hermit would cook just that much
herb, &c. as would be needed for the offerings, and he himself would cat
the ripe fruits of the season. Even for one who lives upon
season-fruits, it is necessary to offer the *Vaiśvadeva* oblations into
fire.

The compound in the second line is a copulative one, formed of ‘*ap*’,
‘water’, and the rest; the meaning being that ‘the traveller that
happens to come to his hermitage he shall honour with water, roots,
fruits and alms—consisting of *Nīvāra* and other grains’.—(7).


