+++
title = "009 वैतानिकञ् च"

+++
‘*Vitāna*’, *is vihāra*, *sacrifice*; what pertains to it is
‘*sacrificial*’, ‘*vaitānikam*’; *i.e*., the rites pertaining to the
Three Fires this he shall ‘*offer*’, perform.

The term ‘*agnihotra*’ primarily denotes the wild barley and other
substances that are employed in sacrificial oblations; and it is not the
name of a particular rite; it is in this sense that we have the term
used as the object of the verb ‘*shall offer*’; and we get at the
meaning that ‘he shall offer, by means of the *Agnihotra* and other
rites, the oblations into the *Āhavanīya Fire*;’—it is in this way that
the use of the verb ‘*juhuyāt*’, ‘*shall offer*’ becomes justified. In
this explanation the word ‘*agnihotra*’ becomes synonymous with the
denotation of the root ‘*hu*’, ‘to offer into the fire.’

*Objection*—“The text has just prescribed the optional alternative of
committing his wife to his sons; in this case how can the man, in the
absence of his wife, be entitled to the performance of *śrauta* rites?
It might be said that ‘the man would be entitled to them in the same way
as the man away from home is entitled; just as the man who is away from
home, though at a distance from the Fires, is regarded as the
*performer* of the rituals by reason of his having made arrangements for
the offerings to be made by a proper substitute, in the same manner, in
the case in question, when the man is starting for the forest, his wife
shall permit him to carry on the rituals; and in this manner the joint
character of the title would not be disturbed.’ But this cannot be
right. The procedure of employing a substitute is permissible only in
cases where the man is forced by human or divine agencies to go away
from home, and not when he goes out of his own accord. Because in such a
procedure, many of the details would become omitted, even though the man
would be perfectly capable to accomplish them (if he himself remained at
home); *e.g*. in connection with the *Darśa-Paurnamāsa* sacrifices it is
laid down that the *sacrificer* shall *make his wife repeat* the
*mantra* ‘*vedo-si vittirasi*, &c.’; and this would be omitted (during
the sacrificer’s absence).

“It might be said that the rule laid down in the present verse may be
taken as pertaining to the case where the householder is retiring to the
forest *along with his wife* (and not when he is going alone, leaving
her in charge of his sons). But this also is not possible; because we do
not find any such restrictive specification. Further in connection with
the contigency of leaving the wife behind, the scriptures have
prescribed another method of disposing of the Fires (in the shape of the
direction that they should be committed to the charge of the wife.)

“Then again, even if the rule wore taken as pertaining to cases where
the wife accompanies the husband, the following direction (contained in
verse 11) would not be relevant—‘With pure grains, fit for hermits,
which grow in spring and in autumn, and which he has himself collected,
he shall prepare the cakes and the boiled messes, according to law’;—the
grains meant here are the wild ones, *Nīvāra* and the like, because he
has been directed to relinquish all his village-belongings; and yet in
the Veda cakes are laid down as to be made of *Vrīhi* and other grains,
which are *cultivated*. Nor could the rite be completed by using any
other pure grain, either in accordance with the maxim that ‘whatever is
produced may be used’ (‘*Utpannanyāya*’), or in accordance with the law
of options (*Vrīhi-nyāya*). Because any such grains it would be
difficult for the wife to obtain. Lastly, the performance of the
*Agnihotra* being a life-long duty, how can there be any relinquishing
of that rite, or of the wife? From all this it is clear that the rule
regarding the entering into the next stage of life is not compatible
with the performance of the Sacrificial Acts.”

On this point a special effort has to be made (for reconciling the
apparent discrepancy).

\(A\) Some people say that the term ‘sacrificial’ in the text has been
used, by way of praise, for the *smārta* (not *śrauta*) rites; and in
connection with the *smārta* rites there are no such scriptural
restrictions as that cakes should be made of the *Vrīhi* and other
*cultivated* grains only. In fact in connection with these rites it has
been declared that—The deities of a man partake of the same food as the
man himself’ (Vālmiki-Rāmāyaṇa *Ajodhyā kāṇḍa*). So that there would be
nothing wrong if the Hermit performed these rites with ‘grains fit for
the hermit.’ Even if this were incompatible with the injunctions
regarding the use of *Vrīhi* and other cultivated grains, this
incompatibility could be easily explained away.

“But even in this case there would be the law relating to the joint
right of the husband and wife to the performance, which would be
infringed by the man doing it when separated from his wife.”

Well, as regards the Vedic declaration—‘One shall offer sacrifices, when
accompanied by his wife.’—this can pertain to *śrauta* rites only so
that the said difficulty does not arise in connection with the *smārta*
rites.\]

\(B\) Another explanation is that the rule laid down in the present
verse does not refer to the Householder’s Fire at all; it refers to what
has been prescribed by Gautama (3.27) regarding ‘the kindling of fire in
the month of *Śrāvaṇa*.’ In the present treatise also, the author is
going to add the phrase ‘following the methods of the hermit’ (Verse
21). From all this it is clear that the rites referred to here are those
that have been prescribed in the scriptures, as entirely apart from the
rites relating to the Agnihotra, &c. And the terms ‘*Darśa*’ and
‘*Paurṇamāsa*’ too have been used only figuratively. Thus the said
kindling of the Fire by the Hermit is to be done by him, without his
wife. As regards the household Fires of the *Agnihotra*, the method of
disposing of them is laid down (in verse 25 below) in the
words—^(‘)Having reposited the sacrificial fires in himself, &c. &c.’

As regards the contention based upon the life-long character of tbs
*Agnihotra-* rite, that the abandoning of the Fires cannot be right,—we
shall deal with this when we are considering the question of the
sequence among the four life stages.

\(C\) Others again explain as follows:—What has been forbidden for the
Hermit is the act of offering oblations of cultivated grains, and not
that of employing these for the sake of the Deities.

“But the sacrificer has got to eat of what is offered to the gods,
according to the law that the four priests, with the sacrificer as the
fifth, partake of the sacrificial cake.”

True; but that *eating* is one that is prescribed by the scriptures, and
not the ordinary one; and what has been forbidden under verse is the
*ordinary* eating. And for purposes of the scriptural act, even if the
man were to go into the village, there would he nothing wrong in this;
in fact it is going to be declared below (verse 28) that—‘he may eat the
food after having obtained it from the village.’

This however is not right; because of the express injunction that he is
to make use of only such grains as are^(‘)fit for hermits.’

Thus we find that the whole explanation regarding the *text* referring
to the fire kindled during the month of *Śrāvaṇa* (explanation B above),
and all that follows is not acceptable.

Further, verse 4 has spoken of the man^(‘)*taking with himself* the
sacred fire’,—and not *leaving it behind*. As for its being committed to
another person, it is going to be laid down that it is to be done either
by the man who is going to die, or who is going out for the first time.
Then again, the *Turayāṇa* and other rites that are prescribed (in verse
10) for the Hermit (and which are all *Śrauta* rites to be performed in
the *Śrauta* Fire of the *Agnihotra*) cannot be explained, if the
present verse refers to the fresh *Smārta* fire kindled in *Śrāvana*. In
fact, this latter Fire-kindling could be done only by one whose wife has
died,—such being the implication of the actual words laying it down. Or,
it may be done in a case where the man retires to the forest immediately
after Studentship-

From all this it follows that when an *Agnihotrin* retires to the
forest, he shall do so along with the Fire, and accompanied by his wife.

In the forest, the rites are to be performed ‘according to law’, with
*Vrīhi* and other grains; and these grains (though belonging to *the
cultivated* category) may somehow or other be brought under the category
(if ‘grains fit for hermits.’ Specialty as *Vrīhi* and *Yava* (which are
*cultivated* grains) are (quite sacred.

For the man who has not maintained the Fire, the duty of ‘committing the
Fires to his wife’ may be accomplished somehow with reference to the
Fire kindled according to *smārta* rules. This would be only right, as
both are ‘*smārta*’ acts. In the case of a man who has two wives, and
one of these has taken charge of the Fires, the ‘committing of the wife
to the children’ would apply to the second wife.

‘*Not omitting*.’—‘Omission’ is disobeying the Injunction; the
non-performance of an act in the form in which it has been prescribed.
This has been added only for the purpose of filling up the metre;
similarly also the term ‘*yogaṭaḥ*’, ‘*taking care*.’ The construction
is ‘*yogataḥ askandayan*’, ‘*taking care not to omit*’, *i.e*.,
carefully keeping up. The^(‘)care’ here refers to the injunction
ittelf—(9).


