+++
title = "032 आसाम् महर्षिचर्याणाम्"

+++
The austerities spoken of above and the ‘Grand Journey’ just spoken of
constitute ‘*the methods adopted by the Great Sages*.’ By ‘*one of
these*’—by drowning in a river, by falling from a precipice, by burning
one self by fire, by starving one’self to death—one should discard his
body.

The result of this is that ‘with sorrow and fear departed’ he reaches
the regions of Brahman. ‘*Sorrow*’ consists in the experiencing of the
sufferings of hell, etc.,—^(‘)*Fear*’—of going to hell. Both these
disappear for the man; and directly—not having to pass through the
several stages of Light, etc.—he goes to the region of Brahman.

The ‘*region of Brahman*’ is a particular place, superior than Heaven
itself; and in that ‘*he becomes exalted*’—remains to honoured. This
does not mean that he obtains the ‘Selfsovereignty’ of Brahman; since
the text distinctly adds the term ‘region’; specially as Liberation is
going to be spoken as being led to from the *fourth* Life-stage.

They say that Liberation is not attained by mere Action.

But this is not right; since in this very work it has been said—‘he
should study the Vedic texts contained in the Upaniṣads in order to
attain the Self’; and ‘attainment of the Self’ is nothing more than
*meditating*,’ *upon the Self and thereby becoming absorbed in it*;
there can be no other meaning of the term ‘attain’. And further what is
to be meditated upon by *yogins* in connection with the Upaniṣad-texts
is the Self:—‘One fixed in Brahman reaches immortality’, ‘he becomes
absorbed therein’ and so forth.

It might be argued that—“there are other forms of success proceeding
from austerities, spoken of in such texts as ‘if he is desirous of
reaching the regions of the Pitṛs etc. etc.’; wherein we find it stated
that man can attain that degree of greatness which belongs to Brahman,
and which is acquired by his determined activity; but this cannot be
*Liberation*.”

But this is not right. Because there is no distinction made. The man of
action is just as much entitled to ‘Immortality’ (which is Liberation)
as to the forms of worship leading to inferior results. It is nowhere
declared that those forms of worship which relate to Non-duality shall
be followed by the *Renunciate only*.

“But, having declared that ‘there are three departments of *Dharma*’,
the Upaniṣad (Chāndogya) names ‘sacrifice, study and charity’, which
represent the duties of the Householder; then it mentions ‘austerity’
which refers to the Hermit; then it speaks of the^(‘)Student dwelling in
the Teacher’s house’, which refers to the Life-long Student; and lastly
it mentions ‘one who is fixed in Brahman’, and this refers to the
Renunciate. Further on, it declares that the former three lead to
‘sacred regions’; from which it follows that it is the remaining fourth,
the Renunciate, who attains Immortality.”

Not so at all; the term ‘*brahmasaṃstha*’, ‘fixed in Brahman’, is used
in its literal sense of ‘one who is given up to meditating upon Brahman’
\[and this has no reference to any particular stage of life\].

“If all men were equally entitled to it, then all that the Upaniṣad need
have said is ‘one who is fixed in Brahman reaches Immortality’ \[and
nothing need have been said regarding the three life-stages\]”.

Not so; what the passage means is that,—‘the several life-stages lead to
sacred regions, which constitutes the result mentioned in connection
with the Injunctions relating to the stages; but if, *while still in the
same stages*, if a man fixes himself upon Brahman, he attains
*Immortality*, which means *non-return to birth*.’

“Those who know the Self have declarered that Brahman is non-dual; and
It is also called ‘one in whom all activity has ceased’; the Life-stages
on the other hand, all constitute the path of activity, consisting of
the performance of various acts leading up to various results; so that
there is a clear incompatibility between the ‘knowing of the *non-dual*
Self’ and the performance of the *Agnihotra* and other rites, which are
inseparable from the stages of the Householder &c., and which are all
based upon notions of *diversity*

Our answer to this is as follows:—This would be equally applicable to
Renunciation also, which also consists of restraints and observances,
which presuppose diversity.

It might be argued that—“For the man who has renounced all activity and
entered the path of Inaction, there are no scriptural injunctions at
all”.

Such certainly is not the meaning of the scriptures. Renunciation is
going to be described as ‘the surrendering of the notions of *I* and
*mine*’, and not the abandoning of all that is enjoined by the
scriptures. Further, in connection with the Renunciate also, when he is
hungry and goes about begging food, the notion of action and agent is
always present. Under the circumstances, what reasonable man could
assert that—“in the case of the Renunciate there is no incompatibility
between his engaging in the said acts pertaining to the ordinary worldly
life and his realising of the non-dual Brahman,—while there is a clear
incompatibility between this latter and the performance of the
*Agnihotra* and other acts prescribed by the scriptures”?

The following argument may here be put forward “When the Renunciate is
hungry and engages himself in eating, there is certainly incompatibility
between this act and his knowledge of Self; but this incompatibility or
incongruity lasts during that time only; just when a man walks in the
dark he may put hist foot upon thorny places; but when the sun rises and
he obtains sufficient light, he places his foot only upon the right
path, which is free from thorns; in the same manner, during the time
that the man is suffering from hunger, he loses sight of his knowledge
of Self; but as soon as the cessation of hunger comes about, like light
in the other case, his firm conviction regarding the Self reasserts
itself and the man regains his knowledge”.

The same may be said regarding the Hermit also.

For the Householder also, there would be nothing incongruous in his
attending to his wife and children and also meditating upon Brahman.

“But how can the man of manifold activities, who has become identified
with *diversity*, ever obtain conviction regarding *Non-duality*”?

In connection with the duties of the Householder also it has been laid
down that—‘he shall meditate in solitude’ (4.248), and ‘having made over
eveything to his son &c.’ (4.247)

“It has been declared in the *Śruti* that ‘the man desiring heaven
should not die before the span of his lift; has run out how then can
there beany ‘giving up of the body’ for the Hermit? It is not possible
for the present text to restrict this *Śruti-* text to cases *other than
that of the Hermit*. Because the *Śruti* is more authoritative, and as
such, could not be restricted in its scope by the *Smṛti*.”

There would be no going against the said *Śruti* if the man were to seek
death when his body is torn up by old age and by sorrows and he knows
that death is near at hand. What the

*Śruti* says is ‘before the span of his life has run out’; where as if
dying were not considered right under nay and every circumstances, then
it would have simply said ‘one desirous of heaven should not die.’
Further, the Upaniṣads speak of several signs of approaching death; and
these also have their use in connection with the *Śruti* in question;
the sense being that ‘unless a man knows of impending death by means of
such signs he shall not seek to die.”—(32)


