+++
title = "033 वनेषु च"

+++
Henceforward we have the description of the fourth life-stage.

‘*Third part*.’—*i.e*, having remained, in the forest *for some time*;
for such time as would suffice for the due performance of austerities
and the proper allayment of longing for objects of enjoyment. The phrase
cannot be taken as standing precisely for the exact ‘third part’ of the
man’s life; because the period of the life-stage is not determined
precisely with reference to one hundred years (the alleged span of man’s
life); because the time for entering on the third life-stage has been
indicated as that marked by the appearance of ‘wrinkles and grey hair’;
and in every man these do not always appear at the completion of fifty
years. Then again, elsewhere it has been declared that ‘one should go
forth on the completion of his austerities’.

“In the case of the other life-stages the time has been precisely
indicated—*e.g*. (*a*) Studentship shall continue till the Veda has been
got up, (*b*) the life of the Householder shall continue till the
appearance of wrinkles and grey hairs; in the present instance however
no such time is indicated; whether we take it to be the ‘third part’ as
asserted in the present text, or ‘on the completion of
austerities,’—even so we stand in need of information regarding the
exact time meant; for there is no knowing by what time one’s austerities
might be completed. For these reasons it is necessary that the time
should be indicated by the words of the text”

It has already been explained that the ‘third part of life’ cannot be
determined with reference to ‘a hundred years’; and as regards the exact
time, it has been clearly indicated by such words as—‘one should take to
the life of the Wandering Mendicant after the body has fully ripened’;
which means that ‘one should go forth after he has performed enough
austerities, and till sufficiently advanced age, to be convinced that
there is no more chance of any recrudescence of the passions.’

‘*Having passed*’— having lived through; *i.e*. having carried on the
duties as detailed above.

‘Renouncing of attachment’ consists in not harbouring notions of *I* and
*mine*, in *resting within one’s self*.—(33).


