+++
title = "036 अधीत्य विधिवद्"

+++
This *Smṛti-text* reiterates what has been said in the following
*Śruti*—‘Man is born beset with three debts—the debt of sacrifice to the
gods, the debt of offspring to the Pitṛs, and the debt of vedic study to
the sages’ (*Śatapatha-Brāhmaṇa*, 1.7.2.1).

“But the Jābāla-śruti has declared that—‘one should go forth as a
mendicant after having been a house-holder, or he may go forth directly
after studentship’."

Our explanation of this is as follows:—What the text just quoted does is
to mention the mere coming into existence of the stage of Renunciation;
and if it were taken in its literal sense it would be contrary to what
is said in the following verse regarding the impropriety of ‘going
forth, without having begotten offspring’.

“Well, when we have the *Śruti* just quoted, what if it be contrary to a
*Smṛti-* text?”

We explain. The necessity of taking to the Householder’s life has been
directly enjoined (with all its details); while all that the text does
in regard to the Renunciate is to enjoin that ‘one shall go forth’; and
nothing is said as to the rites to be performed by the Renunciate, or
the procedure to be adopted in regard to those rites. As regards the
Householder on the other hand, the *Agnihotra* and other rites have been
prescribed along with nil their appurtenant details. This is what we
meant (by urging that the *Śruti* text quoted, if taken in its literal
sense, would be contrary to the *Smṛti-* text). Those persons then who,
not knowing of the *Śruti* text describing the^(‘)three debts’, take
their stand upon *Smṛti* -texts only, and become life-long ‘students’,
find themselves running up against the ‘Householder’s Life’ which has
been directly enjoined.

There are some people who explain the Smṛti-texts relating to the
‘Life-long Student’ as applying to the case of such men as are suffering
from impotence or some such debility, and are, on that account, not
entitled to entering upon the House holder’s Life.

But we do not understand what these people really mean. Their meaning
may be as follows:—Such a person is not entitled to the rites laid down
in the Śruti, on account of their being incapable of properly
accomplishing such acts as *the* *ex* *amining of the clarified butter*
(which cannot be done by the *blind*), or the *walk in Viṣṇu’s steps*
(which cannot be done by the *lame*); and that even so the said
Śruti-texts have their application in the case of such men as are
capable of duly accomplishing the rites with all the said details; so
that there is no need for taking them as forcing the disabled persona
also to perform the acts^(”).

If this is what is meant, then as regards the *Smṛti* -texts also which
speak of the ‘Life-long student’,—such a student also would have to
‘fetch water for the Teacher,’ to beg for food, and so forth; and in
regard to the Renunciate also it has been declared that ‘he shall not
dwell in any one place for a second night’. So that how could the blind
and lame be entitled to these life-stages as prescribed by the *Smṛti*
-texts? In fact the Initiatory Ceremony (*upanayana*) itself is clearly
indicative of all (the four life-stages). Hence the desire of the person
for marriage, which is referred to later on (9.203) in the text—‘if he
has need for a wife etc. &c.’ Though in connection with the Initiatory
Ceremony also, there are several details, such as *looking at the sun,
going round the fire*, and so forth (which cannot be done by the blind
or the lame), yet—in as much as the uninitiated person, by reason of his
having become an outcast, would not be entitled to marry,—it is open to
the man to keep up bis studentship, even though defective, by serving
his Teacher to the best of his ability. As for the impotent man, he is,
by his very nature, unfit for the Initiatory Ceremony; in fact, like the
outcast, he is not entitled to anything at all.

From all this our mind is not satisfied with the view that the life of
the Renunciate (directly after studentship), or that of the Life-long
Student, is meant for disabled people. In fact the two methods may well
be regarded as optional alternatives; as is done in the case of the two
Vedic texts laying down oblations to be offend ‘before sunrise’ and
‘after sunrise’. And it is in accordance. with the alternative view that
nil the four life-stages should be passed through that we have the
passage—‘without paying off his debts &c.’,—which is *deprecatory* and
not *prohibitive* (of Life-long Studentship, or Direct Renunciation).
Or, it may be taken as referring to cases where the married man is going
to take to Renunciation.—(36).


