+++
title = "038 प्राजापत्यन् निरुप्येष्टिम्"

+++
‘*Prājāpatya Sacrifice*’—as prescribed in the Yajurveda; at this the
giving away of all one’s belongings is enjoined. After this has been
performed, the Fires are reposited by the man within himself; the exact
procedure of this *repositing* also has to be learnt from that same
Veda.

The compound ‘*Sarvavedasadakṣiṇam*’is to be treated as a *Bahuvrīhi*
compound; ‘that at which all one’s belongings are given away as the
sacrificial fee’. ‘*Vedas*’ mean *wealth*; and the whole of this is to
be given away. This is the sense attributed to the ‘an’ affix in the
term ‘*sarvāvedasa*’. Or the ‘*an*’ affix may be taken in the reflexive
sense; the ‘*Prajñādi* group’ (which are laid down as taking the said
affix in this sense) being a purely tentative one.

Others have explained the ‘Prājāpatya sacrifice’ as *human sacrifice*.
At this latter the Brāhmaṇa forms the first animal to be sacrificed in
accordance with the injunction ‘the Brāhmaṇa should be sacrificed to
Brahman’; and ‘Prājāpati’ is only another name f or Brahman; and since a
sacrifice is named after its chief deity, ‘Prājāpatya’ is the name for
the *human* sacrifice. Farther, it is only in connection with this
sacrifice that the scriptures have enjoined the *giving away of all
belongings, the repositing of the Fires within oneself* and *the going
forth as a mendicant*. We have the following *Śruti* -text on this
point:—‘Having reposited the

Fires within himself, and regarding this repositing as a worship
rendered unto Āditya, the man should go forth; then alone does he become
securer than gods and men

Some people have held that the ‘repositing of the Fires within himself’,
which is mentioned in connection with Renunciation, becomes fulfilled if
the Fires are made over to the wife at her death; and hence Renunciation
is to be taken to only in the event of the wife’s death, when a second
wife need not be taken.

But in that case the text bearing on the subject should have been in
some such form as—‘in the event of the wife dying first, the Fires
should be made over to her at her funeral rite’, and since the present
treatise is the work of a human author, and not a Veda, the answer would
not be available that no exception can be taken to its words. (?)—(38).


