+++
title = "063 देहाद् उत्क्रमणम्"

+++
There is ‘*departure*’—going out—of the life-breaths; and this
constitutes unbearable pain.

‘*Birth in the womb*’— where there are several kinds of pain: the organs
are not *yet* developed, the child in the womb is in utter darkness, and
it also suffers from diseases, described in the medical science, as
proceeding from the extremely cold and hot foods eaten by the mother in
varying quantities.

‘*Transmigrations*’— passing through—‘*among millions of
life-forms*’;—the soul being born in the bodies of lower animals, worms,
insects, dogs and so forth.

*Objection*—“The Inner Soul is held to be omnipresent and eternal; how
can there be any ‘*departure*’ for it, when it is present everywhere?
how again can there be any ‘*transmigration*’ among life-forms? how too
can there be any ‘*birth*’ for it when it is eternal?”

*Our answer is as follows*:—The theory of some people is that there lies
within the body the ‘personality’ of the size of the thumb, composed of
rudimentary substances, mind and intellect; and it is this personality
that goes on being born during the entire series of births and deaths;
and when this becomes endowed with a certain merit, the faculty of
consciousness becomes manifested in it; and it is through this faculty
that the qualities of the said Personality come to be attributed to the
Inner Soul.

Or, the explanation may be that the inner soul is related to certain
entities in the shape of the life-breath and so forth; and when these
depart, the soul is said to ‘depart.’ Similarly with ‘birth.’

All this we shall explain again under Discourse XII and we need not
prolong the discussion here.—(63)


