+++
title = "072 प्राणायमैर् दहेद्"

+++
What is said here regarding Breath-suspension has already been indicated
in the preceding verse.

But some people explain this verse to mean that ‘one shall destroy the
*taints*’—*i*.*e*., *love*, *hatred* &c.

But how can these latter be destroyed by means of Breath-suspension?
What can be destroyed by it is *sin* (not *love* &c.), specially as it
is sin only which has its *origin* as well as *destruction* both
indicated in the scriptures, and hence imperceptible; while Love or
Hatred and the rest are all directly perceptible; so that what destroys
these, and what is destroyed by them, can also be learnt by perception,
and not through the scriptures. If the scripture were to speak of the
destroying of these, its meaning would be that ‘one should destroy these
things, which are by their very nature, destructible’;—and what would be
the authority attached to such a declaration? From all this it is clear
that what is meant by the term ‘taint’ is the *evil deed* that proceeds
from Love and the rest. And this is ‘destroyed’ by the destruction of
its effects; because as for the act itself, it perishes by reason of its
evanescent character. This is what is meant by ‘*dāha*’, ‘being
consumed’, and not being actually *burnt to ashes*.

Thus the present verse is only a reiteration of what has gone before in
the preceding verse.

‘*By means of Concentration*’—

*Objection*—“‘*Kilviṣa* (*Kilbiṣa*)’ is *sin*, so is ‘*doṣa*’ also.
Hence the words of the text should have been ‘by means of
Breath-Suspension and Concentration he shall destroy all *taints*,
*doṣas*’; and there would be no need of mentioning *kilviṣa*, sin,
separately. Or, only ‘*kilviṣa*’, sin,’ need have been mentioned, and
where was the need for mentioning ‘*doṣa*,’ ‘*taint*’, also?”

The explanation is as follows:—It is absolutely necessary to mention the
‘taint’, in order to show that what are destroyed by means of
Breath-suspension are only particular kinds of sin, not all. The term
‘taint’ stands for Love and other like things; and hence the word can be
rightly taken as figuratively indicating such *sinful acts* as are
prompted by Love, Hatred &c., as has been already pointed out.

“If so, then, let the *taint* be mentioned, what is the use of
mentioning the ‘*kilviṣa*,’ sin?”

No objection can be taken to it, as it is mentioned only for the purpose
of filling up the metre. Further (the use of the second term gives the
further meaning that) Breath-suspension is destructive of the sin
accruing from the taints of Love &c., while Concentration stops the sin
from arising at all.

“What is ‘Concentration’?”

By a longing for sensual objects and their enjoyment the mind is
sometimes drawn away from the point where it may have been resting
during the periods of quiescence, self-control and the like; and it is
by means of ‘Concentration’ that it is concentrated, kept fixed on that
same point. As a matter of fact, when one perceives brightness, charm,
youth, shapeliness of the body and so forth in a woman, they give rise
to his longing for her; all these details are apprehended by concrete
perception; and all such perceptions are so many thoughts. Hence they
can be counter-acted by counter-thoughts pertaining to the defects in
the object perceived,—such as ‘her body is filled with urine and
ordure,’ ‘the very object Woman consists of skin and bones;—fie upon the
men that long for such a despicable object;—even the slight pleasure
that she affords is momentary, and ultimately leads to terrible
sufferings at the hands of the Death-god’. This is what is called
‘reflecting over’ the object. This reflection of the defects is what is
spoken of below under verse 76.

The same method of reflection is to be employed regarding food and other
objects of enjoyment. For instance—‘all this—sugar, cakes, fresh butter,
milk-rice and so forth—stands on the same footing as coarse food
obtained in alms; there being no difference in their nutritive power;
the slight difference in their taste that may be felt on the tip of the
tongue, is felt for the infinitesimal part of a second, so that even
this momentary taste is like the imaginary city. Similarly one may
reflect upon the defects in the objects of touch; and so forth. This is
what is taught io the present text (by the term ‘Concentration’).

Others offer the following explanation of the term ‘*dhāraṇā*’ of the
text:—When a man by constant practice succeeds in concentrating his
breath, moving along his mouth and nose, in the cavity of his
heart,—this is what constitutes ‘Concentration’.

“In what way would this differ from Breath-suspension?”

The difference is that we have ‘concentration’ also when the breath is
held up in such places as the arms, the forehead and the like; whereas
in Breath-suspension there is always exhalation at the end.

Others again hold ‘*Dhāraṇā*’ Concentration to consist in the qualities
of ‘Friendliness, Joyfulness, Pathos and Indifference.’ ‘Friendliness,
Kindness, Joyousness and Indifference, towards all living beings, carry
the contemplation to the regions of Brahman; and these constitute
*Dhāraṇā*’. (says an old text.)—Here ‘friendliness’ stands for *absence
of hatred*, and not *friendly affection*; as this latter would be of the
nature of a hindrance;—‘kindness’ is pity, a disposition of the mind; it
consists in the longing to rescue a suffering person from suffering, and
not the actual desisting from injuring, or conferring a benefit upon,
others; it is in view of this that it has been described as a
*disposition of the mind*, which should be practised—‘joyousness’ also
stands for *absence of grief* at suffering caused by disease, or at the
fear of the sufferings of hell, and not for actual *pleasure*, as this
would be conducive to attachment;—‘indifference’ towards objects,
favourable as well as unfavourable, is well known.

Or again, ‘concentration’ may be explained as consisting in fixing the
mind on the inner cavity of the heart, in the process of meditating upon
Brahman.

‘*By Abstraction, all attachment*:—‘attachment’ here stands (or the
connection of the senses with their objects and their being drawn
towards them. This is destroyed by Abstraction; whereupon the senses
become drawn off from the objects, or their attraction is obstructed.
For instance, when one happens to see a bracelet or some such ornament,
or a handsome woman, he shall not fix his eyes upon them, he shall move
his eyes to something else; similarly with all the senses. In this
manner the composure of the Yogin becomes unperturbed.

‘*By means of Contemplation, those attributes that are not
independent*.’ The ‘attributes’ meant here are those of Harmony, Energy
and Inertia; and these are ‘*not independent*,’ being subservient to
something else, in the shape of Consciousness. Though the soul or person
is free from pleasure &c., yet there appears in him the false notion ‘I
am happy—I am unhappy’; though he is free from attributes, he identifies
himself with them;—all this has got to be destroyed by contemplating
upon the distinction between the Soul and the Attributes; that the
distinction between the two has to be drawn in some such form as—‘the
Person, being of the nature of Consciousness is beyond Attributes, and
it is Primordial matter that consists of the Attributes.’—(72)


