+++
title = "073 उच्चावचेषु भूतेषु"

+++
*Inner soul*—the inner controlling personality
‘*presence*’—character—should be recognised.

Notions of pleasure and pain appear not only among human beings but
among all kinds of ‘*beings*, *high and low*’—*i.e*., among animals,
goblins, Piśācas &c.—there is the notion of ‘I’ and ‘mine’; and this has
to be got rid of.

Or, the man may go on pondering over the following ideas—‘This soul is
omnipresent, higher than the sky, higher than heaven, higher than all
these regions, having all happiness, all tastes, all odours, all
touches; and yet he is beset with hunger and thirst; and in the midst of
such pleasures and pains, he passes through the experiences of his
physical body, known as the *I*; how wonderful is the power of actions,
that even this all-pervading, all-embracing soul is made subservient to
the actions! I shall never have recourse to these acts, which are like a
wicked master. Like a hired servant I shall wait upon the acts (already
done by me); as when a man enters a man’s service being urged to it by
his need, thinking him to be kind, but soon finding out that he is
difficult to please, irascible, given to beating, and harsh of speech,
the man decides that he would not serve him any longer, after he has
cleared off by service all that may have been advanced to him.’ The
thought to be practised should be in the form—‘I shall get to the end of
my past acts by going through the experiences resulting from them, and
shall perform no further acts’, and so forth. Similarly one should study
the Vedānta, and having, with its help, discussed the question as to
whether the embodied soul? are only manifestations of the Supreme Self
or independent entities, and come to the conclusion that there is no
soul apart from the Supreme Self,—he should ponder over this.

Others explain the text as follows:—‘*Dhyāna*’ is *Contemplation*, and
‘*Yoga*’ is *Meditation*; and by means of these ‘*he should recognise
the presence of the Inner Soul*’; and having recognised it, he should
meditate upon it.

Or ‘*Dhyāna-yoga*’ may be explained as ‘*yoga*’, *calmness* *of* *mind*,
for the purposes of^(‘)*dhyāna*,’ *contemplation*;—having secured this
calmness,^(‘)*he should recognise the presence* *of* *the Inner Soul*’;
*i.e*., by means of devout worship he shall realise its presence as
equipped with the qualities of Immortality and the like, free from
defects, as described in the Vedānta-texts.

‘*Akṛtātman*’ ‘*unregenerate person*’ is one whose ‘*ātman*’, soul,
mind, is^(‘)*akṛta*,’ untutored. By such persons the Inner Soul cannot
be grasped.—(73)


