+++
title = "075 अहिंसयेन्द्रियासङ्गैर् वैदिकैश्"

+++
These two verses are indicative of the doctrine that Liberation is
attained by Knowledge and Action combined. The preceding verse spoke of
*Knowledge* and the present one speaks of *Action*.

*Question*:—“What are those acts ‘prescribed in the Veda,’ whose result
is here spoken of as the ‘attaining of the position of That Being’? As
for the voluntary acts, the results of these are already mentioned in
those very texts that enjoin the acts themselves; and if they were to
assume results other than those, there would be carrying the matter to
an absurd length; and it would give rise to the great evil that the
results of the acts would become mixed up and confused. Further, since
the injunctive text would have all its syntactical needs supplied by the
mention of the single result, how could any connection be established
between that text and the additional words that would have to be thrown
in if we were to connect the acts with the further result of ‘attaining
the position of That Being’? As a matter of fact, the needs of the
injunction having been supplied by what is directly mentioned in the
text, it does not stand in need of anything else.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—In fact in the Esoteric Section
(of the Veda) we have a distinct text to the effect that ‘one attains
That by means of sacrifice.’ So that by a proper adjustment there would
be both kinds of results accomplished by means of Action; and there
would be nothing incongruous in all the voluntary acts leading to the
more limited results, as also to the attainment of ‘the position of That
Being’; as two distinct sacrifices performed at two different times
would lead to two distinct results The present text moreover has not
specified any particular sacrifice, which could justify the conclusion
that th.e result here spoken proceeds from the *obligatory* acts, and
not from the voluntary ones.

The following argument might be raised against us:—“In as much as no
results have been spoken of in the Vedic texts regarding any results
following from the obligatory acts, it is only right that what is
mentioned in the present text should be connected with those acts, and
not with the voluntary ones; because there would be no difficulty in
connecting it with them; and what the Esoteric text just quoted has
declared regarding ‘*sacrifice*’ leading to That would also be amply
justified by this construction.”

Why should any importance be attached to the mention of results in Vedic
texts? Vedic Texts are purely injunctive in their character; their
function lies in laying down *what should be done*; and that a certain
act *should be done* is made known to us by such terms as ‘as long as
one lives’ and the like, without the help of any words speaking of
results; so that (even when the result is actually mentioned) the word
expressive of the result is not needed at all by the sentence; so that
in cases where it is assumed (and not directly mentioned) it would be
entirely superfluous, and hence could not be construed along with the
injunctive text. Thus then, the conclusion is that the esoteric text
quoted above speaking of ‘sacrifices’ not being capable of being
restricted to any particular kind of sacrifice, must be taken as
including all kinds of sacrifices, obligatory as well as voluntary.

Further, the result spoken of in the present text cannot proceed from
the voluntary acts; as none of then has been enjoined as to be done by
‘one desirous of Liberation’. In fact it was with reference to this that
the text declared (under 2.2) that ‘being given up to desires is not
commendable’; and also in the *Mahābhārata*—‘May thy acts not be done
simply with a view to results. May thou not be addicted to inaction,”
(*Bhagavadgītā* 2.47).

The conclusion thus is that so long as the actor has his mind beset with
notions of diversity, is under the influence of Desire and Ignorance,
and is not free from the notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’,—the results obtained
by him are just the narrow ones that he had bargained for (on the
strength of the Vedic texts); while the other kind of actor, who
undertakes an act without reference to any results, and simply because
it has been enjoined by the Veda and as such *should be done*, attains
*Brahman* Itself, which consists of the highest boundless bliss.

It will not be right to urge against this the following argument:—“There
are one hundred and seventy-one sacrifices; in as much as it would be
impossible for anyone to perform all these, the text would be enjoining
an impossibility (if it meant *all kinds of sacrifices*)”.—Because in
the present context the performance of the acts is meant to be
accomplished by the attainment of *true insight* itself. The meaning is
that all sacrifices are to be accomplished by the said *insight*. This
is what is meant by such texts as—‘Other Brāhmaṇas offer sacrifices by
means of Knowledge itself’.

Or, the particular position or region spoken of in the present text as
attained (by non-injury &c.) may be taken to be just those whose special
character would be determined by the man’s desires—according as he may
be desirous of heaven or sons &c. &c. In fact persons who have their
minds still beset with notions of such diversity as those of ‘past’,
‘present’ and so forth, are prompted by false longings, even when
betaking themselves to acts leading up to the highest ends of man; just
as when a child is tempted to drink a nutritious medicine by the false
hope (set up before it) in the form that by drinking it it would have
long hair.

Another theory on this subject is as follows:—The acts referred to in
the present text are the obligatory ones. It is these whose omission is
sinful, and acts as an obstacle to liberation. And it is the fact of
these being properly performed, the obstacle being thereby removed, that
is spoken of by the expression ‘*by the acts prescribed in the
Veda*’:—even though these have not been enjoined as leading to
liberation.

‘*Rigorous*’—powerfully conducive to the emaciation of the body.

‘*Of that Being*’—of Brahman.

‘*Position*’—place, region.

‘*Attain*’—Acquire.

Or, the ‘*position of that*’ may mean that character of Brahman which
may be in accordance with his desire; *i.e*., being the Lord of all
beings, or self-sufficiency, or the attaining of its very essence, and
so forth.—(75).


