+++
title = "082 ध्यानिकं सर्वम्"

+++
‘*Appurtenant to Meditation*’,—*i.e*., what comes about only when there
is Meditation; what is attained only when meditation is properly done.

“*All this that has been declared here*’—directly described, not merely
indirectly implied. That is, the cultivating of the feeling that good
and bad deeds are the causes of agreeable and disagreeable
experiences;—when man does something disagreeable, it is always the
outcome of natural fortes of one’s own acts) and stands on the same
footing as when fever causes suffering or fire burns; and just as the
man, who has been burnt by fire, does not hate fire, so also he should
not hate the man that causes him pain; nor shall he forbid him to do it
(just as no one goes to forbid the fire).

All this becomes possible only when there is meditation, when the mind
is duly concentrated. Consequently one should at all times, cultivate
the following thought;—Pleasure and pain are the effect of past Actions;
in reality the King is not the bestower of happiness, of landed property
and other things; in fact it is by my own effort that the first approach
to him was obtained; it is my own past meritorious act that is the real
bestower of the gift, and not the King; similarly the fine imposed
(Penalty inflicted) is not what causes me trouble; it is my own acts
that are troubling me; neither the King nor any one else is able to do
it.’

All this shall always be pondered over, reflected upon; and all that has
been described above as conducive to disgust with the world—thinking of
the body a hut having bones for pillars &c. (76)—this also has to be
always pondered over.

\(A\) ‘*Anadhyātmavit*’;—‘*adhyātma*’ here stands *tor mental
attitude*;—he who does not realise, does not cultivate—the
above-described mental attitude,—‘*does not obtain the reward of the
acts*’; of such acts of the Renunciate, for instance, as *begging alms,
living in the village for a single night* and so forth, he does not
obtain the ‘reward,’ in the shape of *Liberation*. That is to say, the
mere cotemplation (contemplation?) of the body as a hut with bones for
its pillars and so forth does not always bring about freedom from
longing, so long as love and hatred have not been got rid of by the
attributing of all that happens to one’s own acts. When this attitude of
the mind becomes permanently fixed, then alone is the reward obtained,
and not when it comes about only once in a way.

\(B\) \[ *Second explanation of ‘anadhyātmavit*’\]—Or, ‘*what has been
declared*’ may refer to the ‘reposing in Brahman’ (81); and the meaning
thus is that this ‘*reposing in Brahman*’ is ‘*appurtenant to
meditation*,’ and is not attained merely by the performance of acts. And
as regards the question as to what is it that has to be *meditated
upon*, the text adds ‘*nahyanadhyātmavit*’—and the term ‘*adhyātma*’
stands for those treatises on Vedānta that have been composed on the
subject of the Soul;—he who does not know this.—Or ‘*adhyātma*’ may
stand for *that which pertains to the soul*; *i.e*., such ideas as—‘the
Soul is something distinct from the body, the sense-organs, the mind,
the intellect, the life-breath and so forth, and it does not perish when
these perish;—it is neither the doer of acts nor the enjoyer of their
fruits’;—all these notions belong to one who is swayed by the idea of
diversity;—when it has destroyed all evil, it is not affected by the
taints or their effects;—being one, it is all this, there is nothing
apart from it;—diversity is only, apparent. One who does not know all
this as described in the Harisavama, Sadaka and other (?) Upaniṣads, and
does not strengthen these ideas by constant and one-pointed meditation,
does not obtain the said ‘*reward of acts*.’ The sense of the verse in
this case would be that—‘Except at the time that one is either taking
food or engaged in some necessary act, one should always keep meditating
upon the soul as described in the Vedānta and other treatises’.

\(C\) (*Third Explanation*) Or, even though the text occurs in the
section dealing with Renunciation, yet the ‘*reward of acts*’ may be
taken as referring to the Householder also; specially as it is this
latter for whom the performance of acts constitutes the most important
duly. According to this view, the meaning of the verse comes to be
this:—Though Householders may duly perform the *Agnihotra* and other
rites, yet, if they happen to be ignorant of the esoteric
sciences,—those sciences which form the very essence of the rites, in
the shape of the *Udgītha*, which is described as permeating all acts,
and with which all persona learned in rituals ore thoroughly
conversant,—they do not obtain the full reward of those rites, which
appear after a long time. This is what has been described in two *Śruti*
texts of the *Bṛhadāraṇyaka* and the *Chāndogya* Upaniṣads:—(a) ‘O
Gārgi, he who without knowing this syllable, performs sacrifices and
practises austerities even for several thousand years, all this becomes
only perishable; but what is done through full knowledge, with faith and
in full accordance with the esoteric science, becomes extremely
virile’;—that is, excellent results accrue only to him who performs acts
only after having understood the philosophy of the soul. (b) This has
also been declared in the *Chāṇḍoyya—‘Those* who know this and meditate
upon it as frith and austerity etc., etc.,’ (5.10.1). It is with
reference to these persons equipped with full knowledge and performing
the prescribed acts that the *Śruti* has declared that they reach the
region of Brahman by the path of light etc.(82).

The object to be meditated upon, for the sake of obtaining the knowledge
of the Soul, having been thus indicated, it would appear as if the
repeating of Vedic *mantras* were not required at all; hence it is this
that is enjoined by the next verse.


