+++
title = "084 इदं शरणम्"

+++
‘*This*’ refers to the Veda; which also is Brahman; as has been declared
in the following words—‘Two Brahmans have to be recognised—the Verbal
Brahman and the Supreme Brahman; one who is thoroughly acquainted with
the Verbal Brahman reaches the Supreme One’;—one is said to become
‘acquainted with the Veda’ when he studies it, understands it and acts
according to its injunctions.

This verse is a commendatory supplement to the foregoing injunction.

‘*For the ignorant*’—those who do not understand the meaning of Vedic
texts, and are yet entitled to and desirous of their reciting. The
revered Vyāsa has declared success for the mere reciter. Or, ‘ignorant’
may mean *those not knowing the true nature of the Soul*; *i.e*., those
who have not realised, with the help of the scriptures, the real nature
of the Soul, and though engaged in meditation upon it, have not yet
acquired the requisite steadiness of the mind.

For these people the Veda is the ‘*refuge*’; as by reciting it, acting
in accordance with it and acquiring some knowledge of it, they are saved
from falling into the life of worms and insects, or into hell.

‘*This for the learned*.’ The text proceeds to show how. it is the
‘refuge’ for the learned—‘*this for those seeking heaven*;’—*i.e*.,
those who know only the Ritualistic Sections of the Veda, and have not
acquired any firm conviction regarding the Soul; and when these people
perform the rites laid down in the Veda, they obtain heaven and other
rewards. Others however, who have renounced all attachment and destroyed
all passions, and are intent upon the contemplation of the real nature
of the Soul, obtain ‘*immortality*’, *i.e*., non-return to the cycle of
births and deaths.

For all these the Veda is the only ‘*refuge*’, and there is no other
path. Such is the sense of the verse—(84)
