+++
title = "088 सर्वे ऽपि"

+++
**(verses 6.87-88)  
**

*Objection*:—“Inasmuch as the author has promised that he is going to
expound the duties of the Renouncer of the Veda, the assertion of the
sequence of the life-stages is entirely irrelevant.”

In answer to this some people have explained that the four life-stages
have been mentioned in the present context with a view to show that
‘Renunciation (of the Veda)’ is not a distinct stage, being included
among these same four; and the question arising as regards the
particular stage in which it is included, the present verse points out
that it is included in the state of the ‘Householder’; since the man has
to dwell in the ‘house.’

Others however point out that the said ‘Renunciation of the Veda’ is to
be included under the fourth stage of ‘going forth as a mendicant’,
since it resembles this latter on this point that in both there is
‘renouncing of attachments’; nor is any need for including it under any
one stage; because by virtue of the qualities of the man and of the
Renunciate, the man would no longer have anything to do with sacrifices
and other acts; specially as these have been enjoined by means of such
specific words and expressions as restrict them to a definite lifestage.

“But if the man belongs to no life-stage, he would be liable to the
penalty of the expiatory rite that has been prescribed for one who, for
one year, remains outside the pale of all orders.”

Since such a state of things would have been brought about by the strict
observance of the words of the text, how could there be any liability to
an expiatory penance?

From all this it follows that the other orders have been mentioned in
the present text for the purpose of eulogising Renunciation; and this
serves the purpose of lending support to the view that the. combination
of knowledge and action’ (as represented by the four orders) is
necessary (for liberation).

In view of the fact that the house is the shelter, the dwelling-place,
for all these orders, they have the Householder for their ‘*source*’,
their support. Such is the explanation of the compound.—(88)


