+++
title = "089 सर्वेषाम् अपि"

+++
“What is asserted here does not appear to be right. For what it means is
that the order of the Householder is directly enjoined by Vedic texts,
which speak of the others only as supported by the former. In fact, in
the event of the order of the Householder alone being directly enjoined
by the Veda, there would be no room for the other orders; because the
Vedic text (laying down Householding) would be more authoritative than
the *Smṛti* -texts laying down austerities and other things (connected
with the other orders.)’—It might be argued in this connection that—‘the
words of the present verse are not to be construed as *By reason of the
injunction of the Vedic text* (the Householder is superior), but that
*the superiority of the Householder spoken of in the Vedic text is due
to the fact of his supporting the others*; this is what is made clear by
the sentence ‘*he supports the other three*’.—It has however got to be
explained how this can be.—It may be urged that this would be so on
account of the other orders also being enjoined in the Veda.—But if they
are enjoined in the Veda, (and this is what is referred to in the
present verse), then the present -text clearly runs counter to the Smṛti
text that—‘the Householder’s order alone is directly enjoined by the
Veda’ (*Gautama*, 3.36). Nor is there any other construction
possible.—It might be urged that ‘In view of the *Jābāla-śruti*, where
we read that, having become a Householder, one shall become a Hermit,
and having become a Hermit he shall go forth as a Wandering
Mendicant,—all the orders are equally *enjoined by the Veda*’.—But even
So, the contradiction of the *Smṛti-* text remains unexplained. Then
again, this *Jābāla-śruti* is not injunctive in connection with the
other orders; it does not contain any such injunction as that ‘one shall
wander about in the forest in such and such a manner,’—such and such
acts shall be done by the man dwelling in the forest,—and such and such
by the man who has gone forth as a Wandering Mendicant’,—in the way in
which the duties of the Householder, beginning from the Laying of the
Fire and ending with the Final Sacrifice, are found to be directly laid
down; it merely mentions their name—‘having become a householder &c.’
From all this it is clear that to speak of the Householder’s order as
well as the other orders as equally enjoined in the Veda involves a
contradiction of what has gone before.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—It is true that for the man who
has taken a wife to himself, the Veda has directly enjoined the duties,
commencing with fire-laying and ending with the final sacrifice. Now, in
connection with the marriage-rite itself, we have to consider the
question as to what it is by which that act of marriage is
prompted,—whether It is prompted by the Vedic texts that speak of
persons entitled to offer the *Agni-hotra* -libations?—or by the
injunction that lays down the duty of begetting children?—or by the
visible (worldly) purpose of the man?

“What sexual love prompts is only the taking of a woman, and not the
*marriage-rite*; that alone can be regarded as prompting an act, without
which this latter could not be accomplished; and for persons influenced
by sexual love, all their domestic business would be accomplished by
simply having a woman; why then should they need to perform the
marriage-rites?”

This would be all right, if intercourse with a mere woman in general
were not forbidden. Though what the Veda says regarding the fire-laying
may apply to any woman in general, yet the scriptures always make a
distinction between the woman with whom one may, or she with whom he may
not, have inter course. It is for this reason that for men with a steady
character, the desired purpose cannot be accomplished without marriage.
So that it is only natural that there should be the idea that marriage
is prompted by the Veda itself.

“If it be as the text says, then there would be nothing to prompt the
other orders. And the purposes of all orders being accomplished by
Householdership alone, what would be the need of examining what prompts
the others. That which prompts the marriage may serve as the prompter
(of Householdership); but if Householdership alone is actually enjoined,
how could the other orders come about? Under the circumstances again,
how far would any investigation into the prompter of marriage be
justified?”

Our answer is as follows:—It has been asserted that the purposes of all
the orders are fulfilled (by Householdership). This is quite true; when
one order has been duly prompted, and the aid required by the others
becomes indirectly accomplished by the same, there can be no heed for
the assumption of what would prompt these latter. For instance, the
*Vrīhi* corn, the acquiring of which is prompted by the motive of
livelihood, is also used in the performance of rites; and there is no
acquiring of property for the purpose of the rites;—or again, even
though the unlearned man is not entitled to the performance of
sacrifices, yet the acquiring of learning is not prompted by those
performances, being, as it is, already accomplished in obedience to the
injunction of Vedic study itself. Similarly in the case in question (of
marriage), the necessary motive being already supplied by the man’s own
desires, the act does, not need the prompting of Vedic texts. Thus the
injunction of the acts to be done would be applicable to those also who
have not married.

Thus it is that the man who has all his passions deadened during the
period of Studentship itself, does not wish to marry at all; and such a
person, on account of having no companion (wife), would not be entitled
to the second order. Thus not being entitled to the rites prescribed in
the Vedic texts, he would naturally take to the next (the third) order
(having skipped over Householdership).

Others have offered the following explanation:—Marriage does not stand
on the same footing as Property. Without some property living is
impossible, as it is on property that man lives; but in the absence of
the wife living is not impossible; so that the wife is not as essential
as property; and the act of marrying a wife is prompted soley by
considerations of religious acts (which cannot be done without a wife);
and it is necessary to realise in this connection the necessity of
making every effort to become entitled to the performance of religious
acts. Otherwise, (if no such effort were necessary), having lost his
title to such acts by reason of the impurity brought about by
evacuations, if one were to omit the necessary purifying processes, he
would not be open to the charge of having omitted an obligatory duty;
under the circumstances, why should anyone take the trouble of getting
rid of the impurity caused by death and other circumstances?—It might be
argued that this latter is also itself enjoined.—Even so, the omission
would involve the transgression of this one injunction only, and not of
the thousands of injunctions (relating to the acts that the man would
perform after due purification).

In answer to this, the following arguments may be put forward:—“Of what
particular injunction would it be the meaning that ‘for the sake of
acquiring the title to the performance of religious acts, the agent
shall make an effort to accquire that title’? All the Injunctions that
there are pertain to the performance of the *Agnihotra* and other rites,
and all that they lay down is that the acts therein specified ought, to
be performed, and they do not urge the bringing into existence of the
Fires. These fires are kindled, in connection with the voluntary acts,
by the man who undertakes them through desire for the rewards to be
obtained from them; and it is only when these Fires have been thus
kindled that the man becomes ‘one who has laid the Fires,’ and hence
subject to the injunctions relating to the lifelong performance of the
*Agnihotra* rites. Then again, it is only the man with a wife that is
entitled to the ‘laying of fire’; so that the man would desire to marry
a wife in the same manner as he lays the Fires for the purpose of
acquiring the title to the performance of religious acts. So that the
sense of no Injunction is offended if one omits to acquire the title to
the performance of the Agnihotra and other rites \[simply because there
is no such Injunction as that one *shall acquire this title* \]. Nor
does the Injunction of Marriage itself indicate that *marriage shall be
performed*; because the act of Marriage is a sanctificatory or
sacramental rite, just like the Vedic rites of the obligatory daily
*Agnihotra* and other rites; specially as no rewards are mentioned in
connection with it.”

In answer to this the ancients offer the following explanation: There is
a direct Vedic text laying down the paying off of the ‘three
debts’—‘When the Brāhmaṇa is born, he is born beset with three debts &c.
&c.’; and this text becomes applicable to the man as soon as he is born;
this ‘birth’ can not refer to the second ‘birth’ in the form of
‘Initiation’; as in that case, the man would be as good as an animal,
prior to his ‘Initiation’. In fact the exact time referred to by the
passage speaking of the ‘debts’ is that at which the man, having been
born, comes to realise his responsibilities. Thus then, after the has
accquired learning and thus become entitled to marry, if after having
sought for a bride, he fails to obtain one and becomes grey, he would
certainly be entitled to proceed to the stage of the Hermit. In fact,
such a man comes to the following conclusion—‘all through my youth I
have been seeking for a bride;—they say that Fire-laying has been
enjoined for only such men as have their hair still black;—and by the
man of grey hairs Fire is not to be laid except in the event of his wife
having died,—such is the meaning that they attribute to the Vedic
Injunction’.

The ‘*Householder is the best of all*’, because of his connection with
religious acts; hence the superiority belongs to the *stage* itself (not
to the *man*).

‘*These three*.’—That it supports the other three stages is another
ground for its superiority. This is what has been referred to by the
text—‘By means of knowledge and by good &c. &c.’—(89).

This same dea (idea?) is further supported by means of an example.—


