+++
title = "094 दश-लक्षणकन् धर्मम्"

+++
‘*Being freed from debts, should take to Renunciation*.’—This text is
meant to lay down that Renunciation should come only after the three
debts have been paid off. Just as all men are not entitled to go forth
as a mendicant at the same period of their life, so with Renunciation
also.

‘*Having duly learnt the Vedānta texts*’.—There is no renunciation for
one who has not learnt what is contained in the *Vedānta* texts. Though
the performance of Rites, as well as the learning of the Vedānta, are
both implied in the injunction of ‘Vedic study’—both kinds of texts
being equally ‘Veda,’—yet the learning of the Vedānta texts has been
reiterated here for the purpose of laying special stress on it; the
sense being that ‘the man shall devote himself entirely to it’.

“What is the actual meaning of the injunction.—‘*shall take to
Renunciation*’? What is thia that is called ‘Renunciation’?”

‘Renunciation’ consists of abandoning the notion that ‘this is *mine*’.

“What have been referred to above are the ‘*Renouncers of the Veda*’,
from which it would seem as if there were ‘renunciation’ of the ‘Veda’
or of ‘what is contained in the Veda’,—and not that of such acts as the
*accepting of gifts* and the like, which are done for the purpose of
enabling the man to perform the acts enjoined by the Veda.”

In verse 84 above it has been declared that the Veda is the ‘refuge for
those seeking immortality’; so that Vedic study is enjoined even for
that stage at which *Knowledge* (and not Action) becomes the
predominating factor in one’s life. In as much as the *Agnihotra* and
other rites are accomplished with the help of material substances, they
naturally become *renounced* when there is no sense of property (the
notion *of mine*). Such ‘renunciation’ is meritorious only for one whose
wife is dead, or who, having made arrangements for the upkeep of bis
Fires, concentrates his attention on the Supreme Self. We read in the
*Bṛhadāraṇyaka Upaniṣad*—‘when he thinks of going away, he says to his
son &c. &c.,’ which lays down the handing over of the Fires. This
renunciation of the Fires is enjoined also for the decrepit old man—‘By
decrepitude does he become absolved from this.’ Those rites however
which do not take the aid of material substances—such for instance as
the Twilight Prayers, the daily *Agnihotra* and the like—the performance
of these being not forbidden, one remains entitled to it till his very
last breath.—(94).


