+++
title = "097 एष वो"

+++
‘*Fourfold Duty*’—pertaining to the four life-stages; all this has been
expounded for the *Brāhmaṇa*.

“At the outset the text has spoken of the *twice-born person*, in the
opening verse—‘Having thus lived the life of the. Householder, the
accomplished *twice-born person* &c. &c.’, and it has been decided that
the term stands for all the three castes, as there is no sort of
incongruity involved in this. Under the circumstances, the term
‘*brāhmaṇa*’ of the present verse should also be taken as standing for
all the three castes. There would be a justification for denying this
only if the entire Discourse did not form one organic whole, beginning
from the opening verse and ending with the present verse. As a matter of
fact, the opening verse is perfectly amenable to being construed with
this last verse (the whole discourse thus forming one organic whole); so
that it is quite open to us to take this verse as referring to what has
been mentioned in the opening verse.”

As a matter of fact, the sentence is regarded as having that meaning
which is found to be expressed by it, after a thorough consideration of
the sentence as a whole. And in this way, it is distinctly more
reasonable to take the term ‘twice-born person’ (of the opening verse)
us standing for the *Brāhmaṇa* (rather than the other wav). Because
every ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ also is ‘twice-born’, but every ‘twice-born person’
is not a ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’. So that the term ‘twice-born’ being capable of
being directly applied to the *Brāhmaṇa*, it cannot be right to take the
term ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ as indirectly indicating the wider circle of
*twice-born* persons.

“But in the *Mahābhārata* we find three life-stages laid down for the
*Śūdra* also;—having started with the words ‘for the *Śūdra* who has
accomplished all his work, there is *attendance*, it goes on to say ‘all
the life-stages have been prescribed for him, except the
*Nirāmiṣa*’—that is Renunciation.”

This is not right. Such is not the meaning of the text quoted; what it
means is as follows—‘the *Śūdra* should not have recourse to the four
stages, he obtains the reward of all the stages by means of *service*
and the *begetting* *of* *children*’;—which means that—‘during
Householdership he obtains, by means of serving the twice-born men, the
rewards of all stages, with the sole exception of Liberation, which is
the reward of Renunciation.’

From this it follows that the Four Life-stages are meant for the
*Brāhmaṇa* only.—(97)



Thus ends the *Bhāṣya* on Discourse VI.

Printed by Rameshwar Pathak at the Tara Printing Works, Benares.


