+++
title = "001 व्यवहारान् दिदृक्षुस्"

+++
It has been laid down that the protection of the people is a duty of the
king; and this duty has been described in the following text: (*a*) ‘As
a means of livelihood, to carry arms and weapons for the Kṣatriya, and
to trade, to rear cattle and agriculture for the Vaiśya, and the serving
of the twice-born for the Śūdra’—(10.79). The king who acts up to this
attains unexcelled regions; and in this manner virtue prospers among the
people.

Other castes also, who may be living the life of the Eṣattriya, are
entitled to kingship:—‘Whoever happens to be the protector of the people
is regarded as the *king*, Lord-Protector; and their duty has been
ordained to consist in the good of the common people.’ By ‘protection’
here is meant the *removal of troubles*.

Troubles are of two kinds —*seen* and *unseen*. It is a case of ‘seen
trouble’ when the weaker man is oppressed by the stronger, who takes
away by force his belongings; and it is a case of ‘unseen trouble’ when
the latter person suffers pain in the other world, through the sin
accruing to him on account of his having transgressed the law (by taking
what did not belong to himself). People very often act towards pne
another in hatred, jealousy and so forth, and hence going by the wrong
path, they become subject to ‘unseen’ evils; and thence follows the
disruption of the kingdom; since it is only the *prosperity of the
people* that is called ‘kingdom’; so that when the people are in
trouble, where would the ‘kingdom’ lie?

It is for this reason that when cases are investigated and decided in
strict accordance with the ordinances of scriptures, people, through
fear, do not deviate from the right path; and hence they become
protected against both kinds of trouble. Then again, in as much as for
the king there is no other lawful moans of livelihood except the fines
imposed upon criminals, and the taxes and duties, any obstacles in the
proper administration and collection of those leads the kingdom into
trouble.

From all this it follows that for the sake of preserving the kingdom,
the investigation of cases is necessary, and it is this that is now
described.

The term ‘*vyavahāra*,’ ‘case,’ is the name given to that action of the
plaintiff and the defendant which they have recourse to for the purpose
of reclaiming their rights. Or, it may stand for the non-payment of
debts and such other matters themselves, which often become the subjects
of dispute and as such fit for investigation, which thus becomes the
duty of the king.

The term ‘*desirous of investigating*’ is to be construed with ‘shall
investigate the suits’ (of the next verse) and the said ‘points of
dispute’ are referred to in detail again (in verse 4)—‘Of these, the
first is non-payment of debts, etc.’; the construction being that ‘he
shall investigate all these matters.’

The ‘court’ is that place which is presided over by the officer going to
be described below;—‘*entering*’ means *going into* the place.

The question arising as to whether or not the king shall enter the
Court, alone, unattended, the text adds—‘*along with Brāhmaṇas*.’

*Question*.—“What does the adjective ‘*versed in counsel*’ qualify? It
cannot qualify the ‘*councillors*’; as the said qualification is implied
by the very name ‘councillor,’ for one who does not know the art of
counselling can never be called a ‘councillor.’ Nor can it qualify the
‘Brāhmaṇas’; because since they are entrusted with the work of
investigating cases, the knowledge of *counsel* (if prescribed) could be
prescribed only for some transcendental purpose.”

To the above we offer the following reply: The qualification is of the
‘Brāhmaṇas’; if they were ignorant of counsel, they would arrive at
random and wrong conclusions, and thereby bring trouble to the King, for
instance, if a certain ordinary person were to file a suit against some
one connected with the Chief Minister,—and the latter happens to lose
the case,—then, if he were not fined, or if he were not forced to pay up
the fine, the administration of justice would not be impartial; and the
people would come to the conclusion that the King is cither partial or
too weak-minded;—on the other hand, if the man were fined, this would
displease the Chief Minister, and that also would lead to trouble among
the people. In such cases, if the investigating officers happen to be
‘versed in counsel,’ then, whenever they are in any such suspense, they
postpone the proceedings of the case, under some pretext, and advise the
King in private, to the following effect—‘You please do something
yourself, whereby the man may be made to compromise between these two
parties,—this party loses and that party wins the case,—but the case has
not been disposed of by us; the decision now rests with your Majesty.’
Thereupon, the King, having come to know the facts of the case, orders
the Chief Minister to the following effect—‘Your man is going to lose
his case,—but for the present the decision has been postponed, in order
that your prestige may not suffer; it is for you to do something whereby
the other party may be appeased and his grievance removed.’ Upon this
the Minister, whose advice is accepted by all men, takes steps to stop
the evil propensities of all men.

Others hold that, just as the single eye of the crow operates in both
sockets, so the epithet ‘*versed in counsel*’ is applicable to both,
‘*Brāhmaṇas*’ and ‘*councillors*,’ but in different senses: when
qualifying the ‘*councillors*,’ being ‘versed in counsel’ connotes *the
knowledge of the details of the cases*; and when qualifying the
‘*Brāhmaṇas*,’ it connotes *impartiality*.

The Brāhmaṇas and the Councillors are not to *enter* only; but they are
to help, in the best manner they can, in the ‘investigating of suits’
(spoken of below). If this were not meant, then their ‘entering’ could
only be intended to serve some transcendental purpose. Thus the sense is
that the King shall not decide cases by himself alone, but in
consultation with the councillors and Brāhmaṇas.

‘*With a dignified demeanour*’;—*i.e*., free from fickleness of speech,
hand and feet. If he were fickle, there would be trouble.

The use of the term ‘*pārthiva*,’ ‘*king*,’ implies that the teaching
here addressed is meant not only for one who is *Kṣatriya* by caste, but
for others also, who may happen to be owners of land and a kingdom.
Because unless he dues what is here laid down his sovereignty does not
become duly established.—(1)


