+++
title = "002 तत्रासीनः स्थितो"

+++
‘*Sealed*’—sitting on the judgment-seat.

‘*Standing*’—not moving, nor seated.

‘Sitting’ and ‘standing’ constitute the only two possible alternatives,
to be adopted in accordance with the gravity of the business. If the
suit is an important one, and there is much to be said (by the parties),
he shall he *seated*; whereas if the suit is a light one, and there is
not much to be said, he shall remain *standing*. in either case, *moving
about* is absolutely precluded. While moving, his attention would be
fixed upon the path he is treading, so that he could not rightly grasp
what is being said by the two parties.

Others have explained that the rule here laid down is with a view to
some transcendental results; and that what is meant is that when the
parties consist of ascetics or Brāhmaṇas, and these remain standing, the
King also shall remain *standing*, but on their being seated, he also
shall be *sealed*.

‘*Raising his hand*’—*i.e*., holding the hand high. This (if taken
literally) would militate against what the *Sūtra-kāras* have said
regarding the upper garment being always *under the right arm*. Hence
all that the text means is that the hand shall he lifted up, and not
allowed to be in contact with any other person near at hand. In fact,
this is to be done only when the King is disallowing a certain question.
This shows that he is alert and carefully watching the proceedings of
the case. For as a rule, whenever a man is devoting great attention to
any work, he holds his arms high. If, on the other hand, he sits at
ease, the defeated party is likely to say—‘The King does not pay
attention to the case, hence the members of the court, not fearing him,
have decided the case against us.’

‘*Hand*’ here stands for the *arm*; otherwise if one were to keep the
*hand* only lifted up throughout the proceedings, this would be
extremely painful. Nor is the advice offered with a view to any
transcendental purpose.

‘*Subdued in dress and ornaments*’—What was meant by ‘*dignified
demeanour*’ in the preceding verse was that he should keep control over
his external and internal organs in relation to their respective
objects; and this was with a view to being easily accessible to even the
most modest suitors. If he were too gaudy in his appearance, it would be
difficult for the more modest suitors to retain their presence of mind.

It is for this reason that gaudy dress and ornaments should be avoided.
‘*Dress*’ stands for the making up of the hair and clothes;
‘*ornaments*’ for ‘*Karṇikā*’ (the lotus-shaped Ear-ornament) and the
rest. So ‘gaudy dressing’ would consist in the wearing of
richly-coloured clothes and so forth. If the King is gaudily dressed and
wearing brightly be-jewelled ornaments, it could be as difficult to look
at him as at the sun, for ordinary people, specially for the accused
(who would thus lose their presence of mind during the trial).

‘*Look into*.’—This declares the purpose for which the King; is to enter
the Court-room.

This teaching regarding the King himself ‘looking into’ the suits is
with special reference to the inflicting of punishments; and applies to
the entire investigation, ending with the full setting forth of the
statements of both parties. And the intention is that by doing this he
would be fulfilling his duty of ‘protecting’ the people. Such ‘looking
into’ cases not being possible for other persons, no one else could be
entitled to it. As for helping in the settling of doubtful points, this
result of the investigation interests all persons; and as such like the
rules relating to expiations, this also falls within the province of the
learned Brāhmaṇa; specially as in connection with the latter it has been
declared that ‘he shall speak out on difficult points of law.’ Similarly
when a case is being investigated where the parties belong to the same
profession,—such for instance as traders, cultivators, cattle-breeders,
etc.,—if other persons belonging to the same profession And that the
points in dispute are such as would affect them all, then they are all
entitled to take part in the investigation.

In this connection they declare as follows (*Nārada*, 1.8)—‘(*a*)
Families, (*b*) Guilds, (*c*) Tribes, (*d*) Authorised person, and (*e*)
the King constitute the very foundation of case-proceedings; and among
these the following is superior to the preceding.’

Of these,

(*a*) the term ‘families’ stands for the body of relations; the parties
shall not deviate from the decision arrived at by these,

(*b*) If however one party should have no confidence in these, and
should say—‘these persons are more nearly related to you,’—then the case
shall he referred to the guilds,—this term ‘guild’ standing for a body
of trailers and others who may he following the same profession; these
persons are weightier than relatives; because the latter, through fear
of relations, do not always exercise a check upon the person who
deviates from the right path; while the members of a guild fight shy of
any matter relating to themselves going before the King, as that would
lend the King’s officers ah opportunity for interfering in the work of
their guild; and hence they always take from the parties concerned
sufficient security against their deviating from the decision arrived
at, before they proceed to investigate a dispute; the understanding with
the person standing security being that if the party deviate from the
decision arrived at by the guild, he shall pay a stipulated line, or he
should not let him deviate from it.

(*c*) ‘*Tribes*’—consist of persons who always move about in groups;
*e.g*., masons, temple0priests, and so forth. They would investigate the
cases of disputes arising among themselves; and for the enforcing of
decisions they shall appoint committees. The difference between these
two (‘Guilds’ and ‘Tribes’) is that the former consists of persons
following the same profession and they can act singly also, whereas
*Tribes* always act collectively. And it is because the Tribes act
collectively that the disputants are afraid of them. According to others
however, the term ‘*Families*’ stands for neutrals; and such persons,
even though not members of the same guild, are conversant with all the
ins and outs of the case, and as such capable of coming to a decision,

(*d*) The term ‘authorised person’ stands for the Brāhmaṇa learned in
the Vedas; it has been laid down that such Brāhmaṇas are entitled to
speak on all disputed points of law. Such a person is superior to the
foregoing, because of his learning.

(*e*) The King’s superiority rests upon his great power. It is for this
reason that when a case has been decided by the learned King, there is
no occasion for what is laid down in the following words—‘If a party,
even though legally defeated, thinks that he has not been justly
defeated, he shall be fined twice the amount of the suit, and the case
re-opened’ (*Yājñavalkya*, Vyavahāra, 306); this is what applies to
other cases (decided by others), For in the case of these latter there
may he some ground for asserting that ‘the judges have not decided
rightly’; but when the King himself has decided it, what can he said
against it?

Another explanation of the term ‘authorised person’ is that it stands
for the Brāhmaṇa who has been appointed by the King to act as his
substitute. Similarly the ordinary householder also would be an
‘authorised person,’ so far as his own household-affairs are
concerned,—this being in accordance with the declaration that ‘the
householder is master in his own house,’ which means that ho is free to
deal with all disputes within his own household, up to the infliction of
punishment,—specially with a view to proper discipline among his
children and pupils; but he may deal with all cases, except the
inflicting of bodily punishment, or the doing of acts conducive to
depravity. What is meant is that in the case of minor offences the
householder himself acts like the King, while in that of serious
offences, it is necessary to report to the King.

From all this it follows that there is no basis for the doubt raised by
some people regarding the right of the Brāhmaṇa and others to pronounce
judgments,—on the ground that the injunction contained in the present
verse that the King ‘shall look into the suits’ precludes all other
persons,—or, for the great trouble that they have taken to establish
that right. Because the right of the several persons pertains to
different kinds of cases. The King’s right exteṇḍs up to the infliction
of punishments, while that of the Brāhmaṇa and others extends only up to
the pronouncing of judgments,—this latter right is distinct from the
former. Then again, the motive of the King in looking into cases
consists in the proper administration of his kingdom, while that of the
others lies only in settling doubtful points for the benefit of other
people. So that there is no possibility of cross-purposes arising.

The ‘*suits of sailors*’ consist in the settling of disputes. Whenever
disputes arise between two persons, settlements should be brought about
by the King by means of careful investigation. Otherwise if the parties
come to an agreement themselves, where would he the supremacy of the
King?—(2)


