+++
title = "003 प्रत्यहन् देशदृष्टैश्"

+++
The first half of the verse describes the means of forming a decision,
and the second mentions the number of the heads of dispute.

The verb ‘*shall look into*’ of the preceding verse has to be construed
with the present verse,—as also the noun ‘*the suits*’; the full
sentence being ‘day after day he shall look into the suits’; *i.e*.,
every day he shall decide cases.

‘*According* *to* *principles*.’—‘Principles’ are the means of coining
to a decision; and they are of two kinds—(l) in the shape of evidence
and (2) in the shape of custom. The means leading to decisions that are
in the shape of ‘evidence’ are in the form of witnesses and so forth;
and those in the form of rules are such as—(*a*) ‘the investigation of a
suit can be regarded as complete only when precise decision has been
arrived at regarding its subject-matter.’ A single witness, who is true
to his oath, and who has been cited by both parties, who have also
vouched for his veracity,—even though he may not have been examined by
the members of the court,—becomes a reliable means of arriving at the
right decision; but no decision can ho arrived at on the strength of the
words of any such single person as is not known to be truthful and has
not been examined, as there is in the former ease; and hence such a
single witness cannot he regarded as helping the forming of a decision,
even though the persons investigating the case may be agreed upon it.

*Customs* also are of two kinds—*general* and *special*. These again are
of two kinds—*congruous* and *incongruous*, in reference to places and
times. As an instance of the ‘Congruous’ custom we have (*a*) the case
where among certain people of the South, a childless woman, on the death
of her huśand, goes up to the pillar of the court of justice, and while
there, if, on being examined by the officers of the court, she is found
to be untainted and possessed of the necessary qualifications, she
obtains her inheritance;—or (*b*) the case where among the people of the
North, if food is given to a person seeking for a bride, then she
becomes *betrothed* to him even though the actual words ‘I shall give
her to you’ may not he uttered. And as an instance of the ‘incongruous’
rule, we have (*a*) the case where in some countries grains are lent out
during the Spring, and double the quantity is realised during the
Autumn,—or (*b*) when an article is mortgaged on the understanding that
it shall be enjoyed by the mortgagee, even if the total amount of debt
accruing become double of the price of that article, and the total from
the very beginning is paid in gold, yet the enjoyment of it remains
unmolested;—now all this is ‘incongruous,’ being incompatible with the
law that ‘the interest shall accumulate to only 80 per cent.’
(Yājñavalkya, *Vyarahāra, 37*), and that ‘the accumulated interest shall
not exceed the double of the principal’ (Manu, 8.151).

These customs based upon the nature of the countries affected are what
are mentioned in the text by the words ‘*principles based upon local
usage*’; and as regards the ‘*principles based upon scriptures*,’ these
are declared in the scriptures themselves. Of these latter some are
rules that have been propounded by the writers themselves, while others
only codify the actually existing state of things. As an instance of the
rule propounded by the writers we have—(a) ‘Facts are ascertained in
accordance with written documents, possession and witnesses,’—as says
manu (8.41) ‘Just as the hunter infers the position of the prey by means
of the drops of blood (so should the king infer the facts of a case).’
Though no worldly usage can be regarded as authoritative as against the
word of scripture-writers, yet in certain cases it becomes necessary to
have recourse to the words of ordinary men of the world; *e.g*., ‘under
such and such conditions such and such an ordeal should be had recourse
to,’ ‘weight is to be attached to possession lasting for such a time.’
Such rules, even though based upon ordinary usage, are included under
‘*principles based upon scriptures*’ But among such rules, those are to
be regarded as authoritative which are found to have some support in the
scriptural texts; while those that are found to be without such support
are not to be so accepted. For instance, there is the rule regarding the
order of words in documents—‘By me, entreated by both parties, who am
the son of so and so, this has been written by so and so—thus exactly
shall the scribe write down’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*, 88). In reality
however, there would be no harm if the scribe were to write down his own
name first—‘I so and so, the son of so and so, am writing this.’ Because
the only purpose for which he writes all this is with a view to show
that the document has been written by such and such a person; so that so
long as the name of the scribe is put down, there is nothing
objectionable in it. If the scribe is known, from other sources, to be a
trustworthy person, then what is written by him is regarded as reliable;
so that if he were to omit the name of his family, and thus fail to
indicate precisely who he is, whose reliability would the persons
concerned investigate, on the basis of other sources of information? But
if from his writing, or by some other means, the writer be recognised as
a particular well-known scribe, then there would be no harm even if he
were to omit his indicative characteristics. In this case, even if the
scribe were to omit to write that ‘this has been written by me, so and
so,’ there would be enough to indicate who the writer is. And it is in
such cases that the examination of the scribe comes useful; and he
becomes counted among ‘witnesses,’ specially when there are few other
witnesses. When however there are many trustworthy witnesses ready at
hand, there is not much use in investigating the trustworthiness of the
scribe.

Similarly there is another rule—‘Documentary evidence is rebutted by
documentary evidence, and witnesses (oral evidence) by witnesses;
documentary evidence is superior to witnesses; hence witnesses are
rebutted by documentary evidence.’ (*Nārada*, 1.145). For this rule also
there is no foundation. For ‘documentary evidence’ is of two kinds: (1)
written by the party himself, and (2) written by another person. The
latter again is of two kinds—(*a*) written by a scribe who volunteers to
do the writing, and (*b*) written by an authorised scribe. The document
written by another person again is, in every way, of the nature of a
witness; so that there is no ground for the distinction made by the
rule, in the words ‘documentary evidence is superior to witnesses,’
specially because the ‘witness’ has been thus defined (by Yājñavalkya,
*Vyavahāra*, 87)—‘The witnesses shall, with their own hands, write down
their names, preceded by the names of their father, adding that I, so
and so, am a witness.’ Similarly, no reliability attaches to what has
been written by a single man, just as it does not attach to a single
witness. It might be argued that it is only when ‘witnesses’ set down
their hands to something that they become ‘documentary evidence.’ But
this difference cannot make the one ‘superior’ to the other. Because
*trustworthiness* is the only ground for ‘superiority’; and this
trustworthiness is equally yet to be examined in both cases. It is for
this reason that in a case when there is a conflict between the two
kinds of evidence, the judge should accept that which is the more
numerous of the two. ‘Being authorised’ also cannot be regarded as a
ground of distinction; because even so, the ‘superiority’ could only
consist in the fact that it is only one who has been tested that is
‘authorised’; but as a matter of fact, all persons ‘authorised’ by the
King are not necessarily thoroughly ‘tested.’ If some one happened to be
possessed, of extremely high qualifications and were absolutely free
from all defects, then he, even alone, could be accepted as sufficient
corroboration. As for instance, the deeds of land-grants bestowed by the
King are accepted as authoritative, even though written by a single
*Kāyastha* scribe. In a case where there is documentary evidence written
by the hand of the person who is not paying a debt, wherein he admits
that ‘I have received so much from this person, and so much has to be
paid to him,’—if he should happen to deny it and say ‘I have not
received anything from him,’—then the party producing the aforesaid
document wins the case outright, and there is no occasion for the
appearance of any witnesses at all.

“It is only on the strength of the man’s writing that it is concluded
that the debt is admitted by him,—and subsequently also the same man
asserts, that he has not received anything; now between these two
assertions, on what grounds is the latter rejects in favour of the
former, and not the former in that or the latter,—both of them being
equally open to doubt, by reason of mutual contradiction? In fact under
such circumstances it is only right that other kinds of evidence should
he called in.”

This would be so, if there were equality (between the two assertions).
As a matter of fact, however, the assertion ‘I have not received
anything’ may he due to the man’s avarice and such other causes; whereas
the assertion ‘I have received such and such a thing’ could never he
made by any sane person without having actually received it. In the case
in question, even if the man were to say that he has repaid the debt,
but did not obtain the written acquittance receipt, either because a
writer was not at hand, or because being engaged in some other business
he was in a hurry,—even so there would be no need and occasion for the
calling of any further evidence, in the shape of witnesses, etc.

As regards the dictum quoted above (from Nārada), it cannot set aside a
conviction derived from the very nature of things.

For instance, it is often found that people go on repaying debts due to
rich persons, and yet do not have the payments noted on the back of the
document, the idea in the man’s mind being either that ‘so much I have
paid to-day, and tomorrow I shall bring in more and then have the total
sum entered at the same time,’ or that ‘in a few days I shall repay the
entire amount and then have the document torn off’;—but when pressed by
the rich creditor, he may be unable to clear off the entire debt, and
the only amount paid remains what had been on the first day, the
creditor would deny even that payment on the ground that the receipt was
not given;—now in this case if the court were to insist upon the dictum
that ‘documentary evidence can be rebutted only by documentary
evidence,’—then how could it take into consideration at all the
possibility of force or fraud (on the part of the influential creditor)?
for there is no possibility of any documentary evidence; and in this
case, even though there is documentary evidence on one side, yet, for
the purpose of coining to a right conclusion, other forms of evidence
are called in; and the same could be done in other cases also. For
instance, in a certain case, one of the parties (the debtor) might
say—‘trusting this man, I executed this deed for the entire sum, and the
creditor told me that I may receive a part of the sum that day, as for
certain reasons he was not in a position to pay the whole sum then, and
that he would pay the balance the next day; but the sum paid on the
first day was all that he gave me, and the balance was never paid’; and
in this case there is certainly an occasion for the calling in of other
kinds of evidence. And if the debtor can produce witnesses in
corroboration of his statement, then the document (produced by the
creditor) becomes impugned, and it becomes necessary for the creditor to
prove that he did pay the balance the next day. If the conversation
between the parties (regarding the part payment) were held in private
(and there be no witnesses to corroborate the statements one way or the
other),—then there comes the occasion for having recourse to ordeals. If
however there be no full confidence in ordeals,—on the ground of these
being not always infallible,—then decision should he arrived at by means
of oaths.

“If such be the case, then the document written by the man’s own hand
becomes untrustworthy, since it stands in need of corroboration by other
kinds of evidence. And this is contrary to the dictum that ‘even without
witnesses, what is written by the man’s own hand should be conclusive
evidence.’ It is on the analogy of this same reasoning that in a case
where a person has not seen the sum being actually paid by the creditor,
but in his presence the debtor has admitted that ‘such and such an
amount has been received by me from him,’—such a person is accepted as a
real ‘witness’; though in this ease it is open to the debtor to say ‘it
was through my trust in the man that I admitted the payment.’”

This argument we have already answered by saying that mere
incompatibility with a *Smṛti-text* cannot set aside the real facts of
the case. In certain cases the aforesaid statement (of the debtor—that
‘I repaid a certain sum but did not have it entered on the back of the
document’) could be wholly out of place; and in such cases, the document
would certainly be accepted as reliable evidence. For instance, in a
case where the document has remained in the creditor’s hands for a long
time, the question naturally arises if the debtor really repaid the
debt, why did he not seek out the document and receive it back; such a
matter cannot be neglected or overlooked for such a long time; and from
this it is inferred that what the debtor states is a lie.’ It is in view
of this that it has been laid down that ‘if there has been any wrongful
force used in regard to any business, one should report it to the King
either at once or within three days.’ Again, in a case where there is
mortgage, but the exact period of the mortgage is not definitely fixed,
and dispute arises on that account, if there is a document written by
the debtor, but without witnesses,—it is not open to the debtor to
assert—‘you said this (made this condition) at the time through your
love (for the thing), but now please give up to me the mortgaged
article’; nor would this be an occasion for his making the statement
referred to above—*viz*., ‘I executed the deed, the man said he would
give me the sum mentioned therein, but he never actually gave it to me’;
because if the debt was not advanced, why did he permit the creditor to
retain and make use of the mortgaged article?

“If such be the case, then the evidence in the case would consist of the
said possession accompanied by the document; while what the writers on
law declare is that possession by *itself* is sufficient evidence; as
assorted in such texts as—

‘Documents, witnesses, possession, etc., etc.’ (Yājñavalkya,
*Vyavahāra*, 22).”

Why is this objection urged against us, when we have already answered
it: What is accepted as evidence is possession *for a definite period of
time*, and not mere possession. What the texts state is—‘Whatever is
retained *for ten years*, etc.’ (manu, 8.147), and ‘One loses possession
of a landed property, if *for twenty years* he perceives and speaks of
it as being actually possessed by another person’ (Yājñavalkya,
*Vyavahāra*, 24).

“What then is the exact meaning of the dictum that ‘documentary is
rebutted only by documentary evidence?’”

Others have explained this to mean (*a*) that when there is a doubt
regarding the writer of a certain document, as to whether or not it has
been written by a certain person, this can he ascertained only with the
help of another writing obtained from that person;—(*b*) that where the
deed has been written before a certain witness, the doubt as to whether
or not it has been written by the man can be removed only by means of
witnesses; as the latter are the only evidence possible in the case; so
that in this case there is no use in producing another writing of the
man;—(*c*) that in a case where the payment of the debt is being
intentionally withheld, documentary evidence is superior to mere
witnesses; because it is possible for witnesses to forget things, or to
collude with one party or the other, or become tainted with some defect
which would disqualify them as proper witnesses; as for the document on
the other hand, this would he in charge of the plaintiff and as such
perfectly safe; and thus it is that documentary evidence is superior to
witnesses. This is what is meant by the dictum that ‘witnesses are
rebutted by documentary evidence’; because even though the man may have
forgotten a certain fact, if he sees some writing of his own bearing
testimony to it, he is convinced of its being true; or when the
witnesses are all dead, if their *writing* is recognised, it is accepted
as evidence.

Other explanations have been supplied by *Bhartṛyajña*, and may be
learnt from his own work.

Though it is true that in all cases Smṛti-texts form the source of
authority, yet rules have to be laid down for meeting special cases; and
it cannot be right to depend entirely on Smṛti-texts; specially because
it cannot be said that the Smṛti-texts bearing upon legal proceedings
are all based upon the Veda; because the winning or losing of cases
deals with *well-accomplished* things (while the Veda bears upon things
*to be accomplished*) and is amenable to Perception and other forms of
cognition;—*e.g*., that ‘one who acts like this is defeated, while he
who acts thus wins’ is a well-accomplished fact. Even the few
indications of these that are found in the Veda are to be regarded as
being on the same footing as the assertion—‘One desiring freedom from
disease should eat the *Harītakī* (which only describes a perceptible
fact). the exact significance of such Injunctive Vedic passages has been
discussed by us in the section on the ‘Purification of things’ (under
Discourse 6, Verse 110 *et seq*.); hence we are not going to do the same
thing over and again.

The objects of dispute fall within eighteen ‘heads’; it is only with
regard to these that disputes arise among men. Mutually nugatory acts
are not conducive to the fulfilment of any useful purpose,—as we are
going to show later on.

Each of these eighteen ‘heads’ is important by itself; as each by itself
becomes the object of dispute, and no one of them is included in any
other. The various ramifications of these are included under each head;
if these ramifications were to be enumerated separately, there would be
thousands of them.—(3)


