+++
title = "007 स्त्री-पुन्धर्मो विभागश्"

+++
**(verses 8.4-7)  
**

‘Non-payment of debt’ is regarded as ‘*first*,’ foremost, only by reason
of the order in which the several heads are found mentioned in the
law-books. Or ‘*first*’ may mean ‘the most important,’—its ‘importance’
lying in the fact that it affects even those who live in the forests.

Connected with the ‘non-payment of debt’ is also the subject of the
‘non-granting of the acquittance-receipt’; when, for instance, the
debtor says to the creditor ‘I have repaid your debt, now let me have
the acquittance receipt.’ This ‘nongranting of the acquittance-receipt’
is not the same as the ‘non-payment of debt’; but though not directly
denoted by that term, it is implied by it.

What are included under the head of ‘non-payment of debt’ are thus
enumerated (by *Nārada*, 3.17)—‘What debt is payable and what
non-payable,—when, how and to what extent?—as also the methods of
delivery and receipt.’

Now ‘payable debt’ is that contracted by one’s self, that, contracted by
his father, and by one whose property he inherits.

‘Non-payable debt’ is that contracted by one’s self, if (along with the
interest) it exceeds the double of the principal, or that contracted by
his father in gambling, etc.,’ as declared in the text—‘That contracted
by the son, or husband or father, etc.’ (Says *Nārada*, 3.17)—‘A woman
may not pay the debt contracted by her husband, or by her son, unless
she has promised to pay it, or if the debt he one contracted by her
jointly with her husband.’ Though all this is included under ‘payable
debt,’ yet when it happens to be such as is contracted in gambling,
etc., then by itself, irrespective of all other peculiar circumstances,
it becomes ‘non-payable’; but all this ‘payability’ or ‘non-payability’
is in relation to the person called upon to pay; and bonce the names
‘payable’ and ‘non-payable’ may he taken as similar to the expression
‘*gobalībarda*’ (*i.e*., generally speaking, by itself, the debt is
*payable*, but under special circumstances, pertaining to the person and
the relationship to the original debtor, etc., it becomes
*non-payable*).

‘*To what extent*’ (in Nārada’s text) means—‘up to the limit of the
double of the principal’; the distinction here also being as before. If
we read ‘*yatra*’ (in Nārada’s text), this term would refer to the
*place* and *time* of payment; the idea being that the debt shall he
repaid *where* it was taken; but if the creditor so wish it, it may he
paid at another place also. The *time* of payment also should as nearly
as possible be the same. As regards time, it has been said that there is
no desire to repay debts during the Autumn, the most suitable time being
either the Summer, when the harvest has been gathered in, or whenever an
income is expected.

‘*How*’ (in Nārada’s text);—*i.e*., so far as possible, the entire debt
shall be paid; if this be not possible, then by instalments, till the
whole is cleared off; and lastly, in the event of the debtor being
entirely reduced to penury, he shall clear off the debt by service, as
declared in verso 177 below.

‘*The methods of delivery and receipt*,’—*i.e*., the signature of
witnesses, the execution of deeds and so forth.

‘*Assaults, physical and verbal*’ (*verse 6*);—the compound
‘*daṇḍavācike*’ is formed in accordance with Pāṇini 5.4.106, the final
‘*ṭhan*’ affix being added according to 5.2.115.

‘*Duties of man and wife*’ (*verse* 7);—the compound ‘*strīpumān*’ is to
be expounded as ‘*striyā sahitaḥ pumān*,’—the compound belonging to the
same class as the compound ‘*śākapārthivaḥ*.’ If it were formed as
‘*stṛī ca pumaṃśca*,’ the resultant compound would be
‘*strīpuṃsadharmaḥ*’ (according to Pāṇini 5.4.77).—(4-7)


