+++
title = "009 यदा स्वयम्"

+++
The Brāhmaṇa who is thus appointed should be ‘conversant with the
eighteen points, well versed in the Science of Reasoning, fully learned
in the Veda and the Smṛtis,—being called the Investigating Judge.’

If, either on account of being absorbed in some other more important
business, or on account of his inherent incapacity, the king does not
investigate the suits personally, then he should appoint a ‘*learned*’
*Brāhmaṇa*. The ‘learning’ here meant is that pertaining to legal
proceedings, and the man’s appointment itself is indicative of his
possession of that learning; because no man deserves to be appointed to
do a work which he does not know. A knowledge of the Science of Morality
also comes useful, for the purpose of precluding the possibility of
wrong decisions being taken under the influence of love or hate. If the
man is conversant with Morality, even though love or hate may be present
in his mind, yet, through fear of the said Science of Morality, he does
not allow himself to be misled_(;) and it is thus that a knowledge of
the Science of Morality comes in useful. As for the knowledge of legal
procedure, its presence is already implied; when the man is appointed to
do the work of deciding legal cases, it follows that he is possessed of
that knowledge without which such cases cannot he decided. The
injunction regarding the impropriety of the man knowingly perverting his
judgment is contained in other texts; and with a view to avoiding this
our author is going later on to lay down other Measures: *e.g*., ‘Three
persons learned in the Veda, and the learned man appointed by the king,
etc.’ (*verse* 11). As for the knowledge of Sciences other than these,
if it were made a necessary qualification for the man appointed to
investigate legal cases,—such knowledge could only be regarded as meant
for some unseen transcendental purpose.

‘*Niyojyo vidvān syāt*’ would be the right reading (in place of *tadā
niyuñjyād vidvāṃsam*’); because ‘*niyuñjyāt*’ is grammatically wrong,
the right form being ‘*niyuñjīta*’; as Kātyāyana’s Vārtika on Pāṇini
1.3.66 ordains the *Ātmanepada* ending for the root ‘*Yuj*’ preceded by
prepositions ending in a vowel.—(9)


