+++
title = "013 सभां वा"

+++
What is asserted here forbids two things—(*a*) he who has accepted the
appointment (of a Judge) should not be unjust, and (*b*) he should not
slur over the injustice committed by others; since both these involve
sin.

‘*Speaks nothing*’;—*i.e*., he who remains silent when another person is
committing an injustice,—or he who interferes in the investigation and
then says what is not compatible with the scriptures or with
justice—‘*becomes tainted with sin*’—*i.e*., comes to partake of the
sin. Hence the man should not entertain the hope that—‘it is another
judge who is judging wrongly, and he may incur sin, I am only sitting
silent and indifferent, why should I he affected by the sin?’

By the prohibiting of entrance into the Court what is forbidden is the
accepting of the appointment of a judge to investigate cases; so that
what is meant by the sentence ‘*one should not enter the Court*’ is that
‘he should not accept the appointment of the investigating judge, or, if
he does accept it, he should speak out what is just.’

This has been taken to imply that when even an unauthorised person
happens.to be present, if he finds that the judges are acting wrongly,
he should not remain silent. To this end wo have the
assertion—‘Authorised or unauthorised, the man who knows what is just
should always speak out’ (*Nārada* 2.2). If he fear molestation at the
hands of the king’s officers as to why he should speak, when he is not
authorised to do so,—then he should go away from that place. In support
of this we have the following assertion—‘When a wrong is being inflicted
upon a weak person, if one does not save him from it, he incurs sin,
*only if he hag the power to gave him*’ (Gautama, 21.19).—(13)


