+++
title = "020 जातिमात्रोपजीवी वा"

+++
It has been said above (under verse 10) that the king shall decide cases
helped by Brāhmaṇas and by three men well versed in council. Now, in as
much as the caste of these councillors has not been specified, it might
so happen that Śūdras might enter the Court, and being ‘councillors,’ it
would be permissible for them to decide cases, and being possessed of
cultured minds, they might pronounce their opinions on matters relating
to the Law; specially in all legal proceedings a knowledge of
Smṛti-texts is not essential, on account of not possessing which the
*Śūdra* could be precluded from pronouncing judgments. As a matter of
fact, grounds of victory and defeat (in legal proceedings),—such as
witnesses and other kinds of evidence—are such as are amenable to the
ordinary means of knowledge. For instance, a man possessed of cultivated
intelligence can easily find out that ‘such and such a person is a right
witness, and not related, by any relationship, to the party citing him,’
or that ‘such another person is not a right witness, having several
times been found to have lied’; and such matters are not cognisable
means of *Smṛti-texts* only.

Thus then the present verse contains the prohibition of a possible
contingency.

Nor is there any definite rule regarding the caste of the ‘Councillor,’
as there is in regard to that of the ‘Priest’; *e.g*., having declared
that ‘he shall with them (the Councillors) consider the questions, etc.,
etc.’ (7.56), the text does not say that ‘he shall consider these, with
the Brāhmaṇas.’ Thus the the meaning of the verse comes to be this—‘even
though a *Śūdra* might learn up hits of Law, and be a Councillor or an
officer for inflicting punishments, yet he shall not pronounce any
opinion on the merits of cases being investigated in the King’s Court.’

What is said in the first half of the verse is to be explained as
supplementary to the above prohibition. Because it cannot be asserted,
in any case, that the Brāhmaṇa, who makes a living by his caste and is
entirely devoid of learning and other qualifications, should be a
propounder of the Law. Hence, when we come to examine its exact
significance and form, the affirmation (contained in the first half of
the verse) is found to stand on the same footing as the assertion ‘eat
poison, but do not eat in his house,’ where also the affirmation (‘eat
poison’) is supplementary to the prohibition, and not a real affirmation
at all.

It is for this reason that the author has added the term ‘*kāmam*,’
‘*may, at pleasure*;’ the very use of this term deprives the sentence of
its injunctive character.

Other people offer the following explanation:—“Inasmuch as the Brāhmaṇa
has been specifically declared to be employed as the Propounder of the
Law, in such texts as—‘the learned Brāhmaṇa shall be appointed,
etc.,’—this in itself excludes all the other three castes, the Kṣatriya
and the rest; so that what the prohibition of the *Śūdra* in the present
verse means is that in the absence of *Brāhmaṇas*, the *Kṣatriya* and
the *Vaiśya* may he appointed (hut never the *Śūdra*).” The rest of it
they explain, as above.

‘*Who makes a living by his caste only*;’—the term ‘*mātra*,’ ‘*only*,’
has a restrictive force; the meaning being ‘he who lives only on the
strength of his Brāhmaṇa-caste, and not by learning and other qualities,
being absolutely devoid of all Brāhmaṇical qualifications.

The term ‘*bruva*,’ ‘*so-called*,’ is deprecatory.—(20)


