+++
title = "023 धर्मासनम् अधिष्ठाय"

+++
‘*Judgment-seat*,’— that seat upon which the pronouncing of judgments is
the principal work done. When he is seated upon his royal throne, the
king regards ‘wealth’ as conducive to the prosperity of the kingdom, to
be the most important matter, even in preference to ‘morality’; but when
he is engaged in deciding suits, he regards ‘morality’ or ‘Justice’ as
the most important thing;—this is what is implied by the name
‘*judgement-seat*,’ which does not mean that ‘morality’ or ‘Justice’ is
a quality of the ‘scat.’

‘*With his body covered*,’—*i.e*., having his body covered up with cloth
and such other things.

‘*He shall salute the guardian-deities*,’—how down to the eight
‘Guardians of the People, Indra and the rest’;—‘*he shall proceed with
the investigation of suits*.’

These two acts—covering up of the body and saluting the Guardian
deities—are laid down with a view to some transcendental result.

‘*With mind collected*,’— with his mind concentrated, hot turning
towards any other thing. This serves a visible purpose.

Or, the phrase ‘*with collected mind*’ may be taken as modifying the
verb ‘salute.’

Though what is asserted here appears to have been already said before,
yet, in as much as the treatise is a metrical one, repetition cannot he
very strongly objected to.

In ‘*Lokapālebhyaḥ*’ ‘*to the Guardian Deities*,’ the Dative ending
denotes the *recipient of a gift*; since under the *Sutra* dealing with
the Dative, it has been held (by the *Vārtika*) that that also is a
‘recipient’ for whose sake a certain act is done; *e.g*., ‘*śrāddhāya
nigṛhṇate*’ (‘He keeps himself in check for the sake of the performance
of Śrāddhas’), ‘*patye shete*’ (‘Lies down for the sake of her
husband’). Nor can the said assertion he regarded as restricted to the
two roots here mentioned (in the two examples); as no such restriction
is mentioned in the *Bhāṣya*.— (23)


