+++
title = "024 अर्थानर्थाव् उभौ"

+++
‘*Justice and Injustice’ alone* are desirable and undesirable. It is not
that the ‘desirable’ consists in the obtaining of cattle, gold and other
things, or that the ‘undesirable’ in the reverse thereof; in fact it is
‘Justice’ that is ‘desirable’ and ‘Injustice’ that is
‘undesirable’;—‘*understanding*’ this—*i.e*., having come to this
conclusion in his mind,—‘*he shall look into the suits*.’

Or, the text may mean that the king shall examine what is ‘desirable,’
and what is ‘undesirable,’—and also what is ‘Justice’ and what is
‘Injustice.’ That is, he should realise the importance of ‘Justice’ and
the unimportance of what is merely ‘desirable;’ or that when the element
of ‘undesirability’ is very large, and that of ‘Injustice’ very
small,—there he shall avoid the former; because it is possible for a
slight ‘Injustice’ to be set aside by the larger ‘desirable’ factor
through gifts and expiatory rites.

In the event of several suitors coming up at the same time, he shall
take them up in the order of their castes; but this order of
investigation based upon castes is to be observed only when the troubles
of all the suitors are of the same degree; when, on the other hand, the
business of the lower caste is very urgent or very important, then this
should he taken up first, in accordance with the maxim ‘he whose trouble
is urgent, etc., etc.’; and in this case the order of the castes is not
to be strictly observed. It has already been said that the investigation
of cases is for the purpose of maintaining order in the kingdom; so that
the rules laid down need not always be followed literally.—(24)


