+++
title = "025 बाह्यैर् विभावयेल्"

+++
What the verse means is that in course of the investigations the
veracity or otherwise of witnesses should he found out by means of
Inference also;—and the mention of ‘voice,’ etc., is only by way of
illustration; what the meaning therefore is, is that it shall be
ascertained by means of such sure indiations as may be possible, and not
necessarily only by ‘voice’ and other things mentioned here; for the
simple reason that these latter are not always infallible; *e.g*., in
many cases persons who are not used to the presence of great men become
flurried, even though they be quite truthful; while those that are pert
manage to hide their real feelings.

The compound ‘*svaravarṇeṅgitākāraiḥ*’ is to be expounded as—by the
*ākāra*—variations in—their ‘*svara*,’ ‘voice’—‘*varṇa*’ ‘colour’—and
‘*iṅgita*,’ ‘aspect’;—the ‘change’ referred to being modifications
undergone by men’s ordinary ‘voice’ and the rest

By means of these he shall ‘*discover*’—ascertain—the ‘*internal
disposition*’— intention—‘*of men*’— of suitors and witnesses.

The ‘change of voice’ occurs in the form of *faltering*, being *choked
with tears* and so forth;—that of ‘*colour*’ in the form of sudden
changes of complexion and so forth;—that of ‘*aspect*’ in the shape of
perspiration, trembling, thrilling of hairs and so forth.

‘*By means of the eye*’;—*i.e*., by suddenly casting on them an angry
look.

‘*By gestures*,’—*i.e*., by the movement of the hands, the eye-brows and
so forth.

It is a fact of common experience that voice and the rest, if carefully
watched, disclose the most hidden feelings;—the fact of these being
indicative of hidden feelings being well known among men, as we find in
ordinary experience.—(25)


