+++
title = "027 बालदायादिकं रिक्थम्"

+++
An objection is raised—“The subject that was introduced was the
investigation of suits; where then was the occasion for the protecting
of the property of minors?”

*Answer*.—This subject has been introduced here, just with a view to
show that the property of minors does not come within the scope of legal
proceedings; it has to be protected by the king, like his own property;
otherwise the minor’s uncles and other relatives would quarrel among
themselves, each asserting—‘I shall take care of it.’ There is no
connection of this subject with the present context. It has had to be
introduced here,—and not along with the exclusive ‘Duties of the
King,’—because in regard to this people may have the notion that even
such property may form the subject of legal proceedings.

‘*Bāladāyādi*’—that of which a minor is the ‘*dāyāda*,’ *i.e., owner*,
in which sense the term is used here. The property owned by minors shall
be taken care of by the king, till such time as he may return from the
teacher’s house, or till he may have passed his minority. This second
alternative of passing the minority is meant for those who pass their
childhood in their own home (and are not handed over to an *Ācārya*). In
the case of one however who has entered the teacher’s house as a
Religious Student, even though he may have passed his minority, his
property shall have to be looked after until he returns from the
teacher’s house. Or, the meaning may he that in the case of twice-born
persons, the ‘return’ shall be the limit, while in that of others, it
shall be the ‘passing of minority.’—(27)


