+++
title = "028 वशापुत्रासु चैवम्"

+++
Whoever may be without a protector, that person’s property shall he
taken care of by the king; the ‘barren’ women and the rest being
mentioned only by way of illustration. It is only thus that the
‘protection of the people’ becomes accomplished. The preceding verse
lays down the period of time during which the said protection of the
property is necessary.

‘*Vaśā*’—barren woman.

‘*Sonless woman*’—one who has no son, or whose son is incapable, or
whose son is in a bad condition.

Between *vaśā* and *aputrā* we have the copulative compound.

“The *barren woman* also is *sonless*.”

True, but both have been mentioned for the purpose of showing that even
though her husband he alive, the said woman may be looked after; as on
account of her being superseded (by another wife taken by her husband),
her husband may neglect her.

‘*Whose family is extinct*’;—this is added with a view to indicate those
who have no protector in the shape of husband’s younger brother, or
paternal or maternal uncle, and being women, are themselves incapable of
looking after their own property,—and whose other relations are jealous
of her property. Otherwise, as a rule, the character and property of
women should be looked after by her relations; as has been thus
declared—‘On the husband lies the burden of supporting and protecting
the woman, for which he is capable; when the husband’s family becomes
extinct, and there is no man left and no standing, and there are no
Sapiṇḍas even left, her father’s people become her protectors; when both
families are extinct, the king is the supporter and protector of the
woman’ (*Nārada*, 13-28 to 29).

When the woman herself is, somehow, capable of taking care of herself,
then there is nothing done by the relations; it is in view of this that
the text has added —‘*of women in distress*’;—this epithet indicating
*inability*. Others have explained the term ‘*women in distress*’ to
mean ‘those whose husbands are in distress’;—even a woman whose husband
is alive becomes a tit object for the king’s care, if her husband is
incapable of taking care of her. This applies to the case of women in
whose family there are no men left to take care of them. The epithet
‘*whose family is extinct*’ thus means ‘those who have *no family*,
*i.e*., relations.’

Others have explained the term ‘*niṣkulā*’ to mean the *misbehaved
woman*; of those women also the property acquired by means of their
beauty has to be protected by the king.

According to this explanation the term ‘*niṣkulā*’ has to be taken by
itself (and not as qualifying the other terms).

‘*Widows faithful to their husbands*’;—‘*vidhavā*,’ ‘widow,’ is one
whose husband is dead;—‘*dhava*’ being a synonym for ‘husband’; and she
who is deprived of the *dhava* is ‘*vidhavā*,’ ‘*widow*.’ Till such time
as she remains faithful to her husband, she deserves to have her
property looked after by the king. In the event of her being unfaithful,
she does not deserve to have any property at all, as we read in another
*Smṛti text*—‘She who is bent upon doing injury, who is devoid of
modesty, who wastes money, who is addicted to misconduct—such a woman
does not deserve to have property.’ Such a woman is to be banished; and
this ‘banishment’ shall be only in the form of being driven away from
the main apartment of the home, and not in being driven away entirely;
because even in the; case of such women as have become outcasts the
scriptures have laid down that they shall be; provided with a separate
dwelling-house, clothing and food:—‘In the case of outcast women also,
this same action should be taken; clothing, food and water should be
provided for them and they should live near the house.’ In view of this,
wherever.we find an injunction regarding the *banishment* of such
women,—*e.g*., in such texts as ‘the woman’s entire property, etc.,
etc.,’—the ‘banishment’ should be understood to be of the nature just
explained. And she deserves to retain what she may have saved from the
fond that is granted her; this the relatives shall not take away.

So far as the present treatise (of Manu) is concerned, in regard to such
women what has been proscribed is *supersession*, and not. the
confiscation of property; as has been declared (under 9.80)—^(‘)She who
drinks wine, misbehaves, or is disobedient, or diseased, or mischievous,
or wasteful, shall always he superseded.’ Hence on the strength of
Manu’s text, the above-quoted text as to the; unfaithful wife not
deserving any property has to be explained as follows:

“Such a woman shall not receive that property which she should have
received on account of her super-session; that is, she shall not receive
what has been enjoined as to be; given to her in the following text—‘To
the superseded wife shall he given a compensation for her supersession.’
But what may have been given to her before that shall not be taken away
from her.”

Our opinion however is that in the case of the woman who is inimical to
her husband, or addicted to misbehaviour, confiscation of property is
only right, and proper; since in Manu also (9.78) it has been declared
that—‘She who disregards her husband when she is maddened, or drunk, or
diseased, shall be abandoned for three months, having been deprived of
her ornaments and clothes’;—*i.e*., she shall be deprived of her
ornaments and clothes before being abandoned.—(28)


