+++
title = "030 प्रणष्ट-स्वामिकं रिक्थम्"

+++
When some one has lost something,—it having dropped on the ground while
he was going along the road, or in the forest,—and the conservator of
the forests, or some other official of the King, finds it and brings it
to the King,—the King shall arrange for its safe keeping and have it
kept exposed to view at the royal gate or on the public road, and made
it known by heat of drum if any one has lost anything; or he shall have
it kept in charge of keepers on the spot where it was found. For three
years he shall thus keep it.

Then, before the lapse of three years, if some one reports with proofs
that the property belongs to him, then it should he made over to him,
after deducting the sixth part of it, which is said (in verse MM) to be
the King’s share; and after the lapse of three years the King shall take
the property into his own treasury.

That ‘*riktha*,’ ‘property,’ is said to be ‘*praṇaṣṭasvāmika*,’ of which
the owner has ‘*disappeared*’—*i.e*., cannot he traced.

‘*Tryabdam*’ denotes the *aggregate of three years*; the feminine affix
being absent, just as it is in the compound ‘*trivarṣam*.’ The term
‘*abda*’ is synonymous with ‘year.’

‘*Shall keep*’—shall have it deposited.

‘*Up to three years*,’—*i.e*., before the period of three years is
over,—‘*the owner may receive it*,’—assert, his ownership.

The term ‘*arvāk*,’ ‘*up to*’ denotes *limit*, and indicates priority of
time or place.

Others have explained the sentence ‘*the king shall lake it*’ to convey
the permission to him to enjoy the property. What these people mean is
that even after the lapse of throe years, it would, not be right for the
King to ‘take’ or possess what belongs to another person; and hence what
is meant is that after the lapse of three years, if the lightful owner
does not turn up, the King shall enjoy the usufruct of the property.

But how will these people explain the verse ‘Whatever an owner sees
enjoyed by others during ten years, and though present, says nothing,
that he shall not recover’ (8.117)? Further, if it he asserted that the
‘taking away’ of another man’s property cannot be right,—then the
*using* also of such property cannot be right. Specially as another
man’s property in the shape of clothing and the like, becomes unfit by
use. For these reasons it is only right that the mention of ‘taking
away’ should he taken to mean actual *possession*; specially as
*enjoyment*, which is the fruit of *possession*, would be present
(according to the other view also). Then again, what sort of ‘enjoyment
of usufruct’ would there ho in the case of such property as the
elephant, the house and the like?

Thus then, there is no reason for abandoning the direct literal meaning
of the words; specially as the root ‘*hṛ*,’ ‘to take away,’ has often
been found to be used in the sense of *possession*, as in such phrase
‘*riktham haret*,’ ‘shall take possession of the property.’ Hence what
the sentence means is that after three years the King shall
‘take’—*i.e*., take possession of—the property.—(30)


