+++
title = "039 निधीनान् तु"

+++
The clause—‘*of ancient hoards, etc*’— is supplementary to the
before-mentioned rule that the king should take one-half of the treasure
even when it is found by other persons;—while the clause ‘*of minerals
under the ground*’ lays down what has not been mentioned before. Gold,
silver and other metals in their crude form, as also red lead, black
collyrium and other substances (in their crude form) are what are called
‘*minerals*.’ So that the man who operates golden and other mines, as
also one who makes his living by digging out red chalk and such
substances from mountains, has to pay the king’s share.

‘*Ardhabhāk*,’ ‘*is entitled to a share*’—The term ‘*ardha*’ here should
be taken as standing for *share or part* in general; because it occurs
in a compound; just as in the compounds ‘*nagarārdha*’ and ‘*grāmārdha*’
(which mean *part* of the city, *part* of the village); it is only when
it is used in the neuter form that it means exactly *half*; in the
present instance however, as it occurs in a compound and its gender is
not ascertainable, it has to be taken as standing for the *sixth or
twelfth part*, which has been spoken of in the present context. ‘*He is
entitled to his share*’;—this means that he takes a part of it.

The reason for this is stated—‘*on account of his protecting
them*’—Though when the treasure is buried under the ground, there is no
need for any royal protection, yet it is open to the risk of being taken
away by some powerful person; so that there is need for the king’s care.
It is with a view to this that it has been added—‘*he being the lord of
the soil*’;—he is the master of the soil, so that when something has
been obtained out of the soil that belongs to him, it is only right that
he should receive his share out of it.—(39).


