+++
title = "041 जाति-जानपदान् धर्मान्"

+++
Kuru, Kāśī, Kaśmīra and other regions with fixed boundaries are called
‘provinces,’ and laws obtaining in those are called ‘*provincial*’; by
which are meant those laws that are observed by the people living in the
province and called after it. Or, the term ‘province’ may stand for the
inhabitants of the provinces, just as the men on the platform are called
the ‘platform,’ when it is said that ‘the platforms are crying’; and the
laws observed by these people would, in that case, he called
‘*provincial*’;—the nominal affix ‘aṇ’ being added in accordance with
Pāṇini 4.3.120.

The compound ‘*Jātijānapadāḥ* is to be compounded as
‘*jāteḥ-jānapadāh*’; the meaning being ‘those provincial laws that
pertain to each caste’; and these have to be maintained by the king.

‘*Having examined*,’—*i.e*., duly considered the following points—(*a*)
are these law’s contrary to the scriptures or not? (*b*) are they the
source of trouble to some people or not?

After having duly considered all this, he shall ‘*determine*’—cause to
be observed—those laws that are found, on examination, to be not
incompatible (with the scriptures or with the people’s convenience); as
it is going to be declared later on (verse 46)—‘What may have been
practised by the good, etc., etc.’

Or, the compound ‘*Jātijānapadāḥ*’ may be expounded in such a manner as
to make ‘*jāti*’ the qualification of ‘*janapada*’; the term ‘*jāti*’ in
this case would indicate *eternality*, and would be only a laudatory
epithet to ‘provincial laws’; the idea being that ‘just as genus is
something eternal, so are the provincial laws also, in so far as they
are not contrary to the scriptures’; all such visibly useful acts as the
feeding of cattle, the storing of water in reservoirs and so forth being
such as ought to be performed at all times.

Thus the meaning is that when the men of a certain village have laid
down the rule that ‘cattle should not be taken to graze at such and such
places,’ then if some one, for some purpose of his own, breaks this
rule,—he shall be punished by the king.

Or, the term ‘*jānapada*’ may stand for *those born in the province*;
*i.e*., the inhabitants of the province; and the compound
‘*jātijānapadāḥ*’ being expounded as ‘*jātyā jānapadāḥ*,’ and ‘*jāti*’
standing fot *birth*,—it would signify the eternal relationship between
the *province* and the men *born* there; and the term ‘*jātijānapadāḥ
dharmāḥ*’ would stand for *those laws whose beginning cannot be traced,
and which relate to the duly qualified persons among those born and
living in a particular province*. And though in this case the proper
nominal affix to use would have been ‘*cha*’ (giving the form
*jānapadīya*), according to Pāṇini 5.2.114, yet it is the ‘*aṇ*’-affix
that has been used; this anomaly being permissible as a ‘Vedic anomaly.’

Or, it may be that the term ‘*jātijānapadāḥ*’ though directly denoting
the *inhabitants*, has been applied here to their *laws*,—the two being
regarded as identical; so that the phrase serves to restrict the scope
of the law referred to,—this restriction being deduced from the men
themselves; the sense thus is that the laws referred to pertain only to
the men of certain localities, and not to all the *Ārgas*,—the former
being such as have a morality akin to that of the lower animals, and not
entitled to the performance of any other duties, they perform only such
acts as are in keeping with their own customs; such, for instance, as
the marrying of their own mother and so forth;—and as such in the
performance of such acts, these men shall not be prevented by the king
having his sway over the whole world (thence also over the barbarians);
because such practices ane permitted by their ‘tribal custom,’
sanctioned by the geographical position oi the locality inhabited by
them. Nor could such practices he regarded as ‘contrary to the
scriptures’; because the *incompatibility* *of scriptures* has a meaning
only for persons entitled to the scriptural acts, and not to lower
beings.

An objection is raised—“In Manu (10.63), such duties as *h*
*armlessness, truthfulness*, *absence of anger*, *purity* and *control
of the senses* have been laid down in reference to the irregularly mixed
castes; and *barbarians* also belong to the same category as those
castes; so that if such men would not he committing something wrong in
marrying their mother, or in not using water after urinating, what sort
of ‘control of the senses’ or ‘purity’ would there be for them?”

This has been already answered. Purity and other duties pertain to the
inhabitants of the whole of Āryāvarta; and so far as the four castes are
concerned, there is no restriction of place regarding the duties
pertaining to them.

Some people have held that the restriction as to the locality of the
‘laws’ pertains to some transcendental results;—as we shall point out
later on.

There are people following a common profession; such, as tradesmen,
artisans, money-lenders, coach-drivers and so forth; and the laws
governing these are ‘guild-laws.’ *E.g*., certain principal tradesmen
offer to the king his royal tax fixed upon verbally by their declaring
before the king—‘we are living by this trade, let the tax thereupon be
fixed at such and such a rate, be our profits more or less’; now on the
king agreeing to this, they join together and lay down certain rates
among themselves, which are calculated to bring thorn larger profits and
likely to be detrimental to the interests of the kingdom,—*e.g*., (*a*)
‘Such and such a commodity should not be sold during such and such a
time,’ (*a*) ‘such and such is to be the tax payable either to the king
or towards the celebration of some religious festival,’ and so forth.
And if any one transgresses such rules, he shall be punished for acting
against ‘guild-laws.’

‘*Laws of families*’;—‘Family’ means *race*; some remote ancestor of
well-known fame may have laid down the rule—‘whenever any of my
descendants earns wealth, he shall not make use of it without having
first given something out of it to Brāhmaṇas’;—and such rules are what
are meant by ‘laws of families’; or such rules as ‘priests and
bridegrooms shall be selected out of those same families out of which
they have been selected by one’s forefathers, provided that suitable men
are available therefrom.’ One who acts against such laws shall be
punished by the king.

These have been reiterated here with a view to preclude the idea that
such laws govern only particular groups of men and as such cannot he
regarded as ‘Equity’ proper.

The transgression of these laws does not fall within the category of
‘Breach of Contract,’ as we shall show later on.—(41).


