+++
title = "043 नोत्पादयेत् स्वयम्"

+++
‘*Suit*’—object of dispute;—none such shall the king himself
‘*promote*’—*i.e*., cause to be instituted;—for encompassing the injury
of some hated persons, or for obtaining the wealth of some rich person,
he shall not instigate his debtor or some other person who may have
suffered at his hands, saying to him—‘you should do such and such a
thing, why do not you bring it up before me?—or, ‘you have been injured
by him, I shall have you avenged’;—any such thing the king shall not
say, even though his hate or greed for riches be great.

When a suit has been ‘*brought up*’—presented before him—he shall not
‘*suppress*’—hush up, ignore, it. The verb ‘*nigiret*,’ ‘swallow,’ is
often used in the sense of *ignoring*; and the root ‘*gram*’ (used in
the text) is synonymous with ‘*ni-gira*’ People make use of such
expressions as—‘everything that is said to-day he *swallows up*, and he
does not answer it.’

Others explain the latter half of the verse as follows:—‘He shall not
appropriate—make his own—any *artha*, *i.e*., money, that is brought to
him in any manner save through the suit.’ If the king were to inflict
fines in an unfair manner, he would he incurring evil in the next world
and bring trouble on his kingdom.

The following is yet another explanation offered by others:—‘*The king
himself shall not promote a suit*’;—*i.e*., even, though he may get at
the offender directly, he himself shall not say anything, until the man
has been brought before him by the man against whom the offence has been
committed, in a regular suit. Because it is only after the man has been
defeated in the suit brought by the other party that it is time for the
king to perform his duty of inflicting the legal punishment. But this
applies only to the non-payment of debts and similar subjects; as for
thieves and criminals,—who are like ‘thorns’ in the kingdom,—these the
king shall capture and punish, even when he catches them himself. The
rest of the verse is as explained before.

‘*Nor any servant of his*’;—‘*servant*,’ *i.e*., person holding an
office under him.—(43)


