+++
title = "045 सत्यम् अर्थम्"

+++
‘*When engaged in*’—dealing with—‘*judicial proceedings*’— the king
shall attend, not only to the mere letter of the suit itself, but also
to truth, etc.

(*a*) ‘*Keep his eye upon the truth*’;—even though the plaintiff or the
defendant, through shyness, may not have stated his case fully, yet if
the king is enabled,—either on the strength of other proofs, or by means
of the ‘inference’ mentioned above,—to find out what the actual facts of
the case are, then he shall, by all means accept them,—and not reject
them, simply because the party concerned did not state them in full.
This is what has been thus declared—‘Having sifted all fraud, the king
shall decide the case on facts.’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra* 19.)

(*b*) ‘*Keep eye upon the object*’;—the term ‘*artha*,’ ‘*object*,’
denotes *wealth or purpose*. The meaning thus is that if he obtains a
large amount of wealth (as the legal fee), then he shall even give up
all other business of state and not hesitate to take up the ease brought
up; in fact he shall begin the investigation at once. Or, the meaning
may be that if some one tells him that the witnesses in the case, or
some member of the Court, have received large amounts in bribe from such
and such a party,—then he should examine this statement in the following
manner.—‘If the cause of the suit is insignificant, the acceptance of a
large bribe is not possible;—but if the cause is worth much, and the
members of the court and the witnesses are in poor circumstances, then
it is just possible’; and the truth shall he found out by other means.
This is to be done by making (*c*) ‘*himself*’ the ‘*witness*’ (*d*).
That is to say, with a view to tracing out the bad characters in his
kingdom, he shall get spies to find out the truth.

Or ‘*having an eye upon himself*’ (*e*) may mean that he must attend to
his own circumstances,—*i.e*., he should see whether his treasury is
depleted or full.

Under this construction ‘*witness*’ is an independent word (and not in
apposition to ‘*himself*,’ as in the former interpretation).

(*e*) ‘*Having an eye upon the place*’;—in certain places even a small
object becomes great, while in another even a great object becomes
small. This is what is meant by ‘*having an eye upon the place*.’

(*f*) Similarly he should have his eye upon the *time* also.

(*g*) ‘*Aspect*’ stands for the nature of the cause; he shall find out
whether it is important or unimportant.

Others have explained the verse as follows:—‘He shall find out the real
nature of (*a*) the *truth* and (*b*) the *object* of the suit, by
making (*c*) *himself* the *witness* (*d*); that is to say, he shall
find out that *truth* is more important than any *object*, since it
accomplishes very important ends and is useful in both worlds, and hence
he should always have recourse to *truth*, and ignore the *object*,
which is devoid of essence. (*e*) ‘*Place*,’ in this case stands for
heaven and the other regions, obtainable by means of truth; (*f*)
‘*time*’ for a prolonged stay in other regions, and (*g*) ‘*aspect*’ for
the beauty of the celestial damsels. And the reverse of all this is
obtained by the renouncing of *truth* and the following of other
*objects*.—(45).


