+++
title = "046 सद्भिर् आचरितम्"

+++
‘*Good*’—those who eschew what is forbidden;—‘*righteous*’—those who do
what is enjoined. Though either one of these two words would have
sufficed to express what is meant, yet they have both been used; that is
the reason why we have explained them as having two different
meanings.—What is practised by such persons, and in support of which we
do not find any *Śruti* or *Smṛti* texts,—‘*that he shall ordain*’—cause
to be acted up to—‘*for countries, families and castes*’;—‘*provided
that it is not antagonistic*’—to directly perceptible *Śruti* and
*Smṛti* texts.

Verse 41 has declared the authoritative character of ‘provincial laws,
laws of families, etc., etc.’; and the present verse adds the
qualification that such laws shall be not opposed to the scriptures.
Local and king-made laws also, even when they pertain to temporal
affairs, are to be obeyed only when they are not contrary to the
scriptures. For instance, in some places the debtor is made to repay the
debt by selling himself; and this is contrary to the Smṛti text—‘by
service also the debt may be liquidated, etc.’ (*Manu*, 177); as is
shown under that verse. Further, under 2.6, the authority of *Practice*
(usage) has been explained as based only upon the fact of its being
connected with (observed by) cultured men; and no man can be called
‘cultured’ if he acts contrary to the scriptures. Hence the present
Terse is meant to be applicable to such practices as do not pertain to
spiritual matters.

Another writer explains the text as follows:—What is practised by the
good and righteous twice-born men in one country, the king should
introduce in another country also, if it is found to ho not antagonistic
to *Śruti* and *Smṛti* texts. *E.g*., the bull-sacrifice and other
similar acts that are well known among the people of the North should be
made to be performed by the people of the East, South and West also.
Because from usage, we deduce the corresponding *Smṛti*, and from this
latter the corresponding *Śruti*; so that if the text thus deduced on
the strength of the practice of the northerners were in some such form
as that such and such a sacrifice shall he performed by the *udīcyas,
people of the north*’—then since the nominal affix conveys several such
meanings,—such as (*a*) birth, (*b*) source, (*c*) origin, (*d*)
destination and (*e*) supplement,—all which fall within one or other of
the two categories of ‘distinctive’ feature and ‘modification,’—none of
these as denoted by the nominal affix in the term ‘*udīcya*’ could help
to mark off any people that could be called ‘*udīcya*’ ‘northerner’; so
that the meaning of the said deduced text would come to be that *every
man* should perform the act in question; specially as the exact
denotation of names of countries is always vague. Even if the text
deduced were in the form—‘the act is to be done by one who is born in
the north, or who lives in that country,’—then this would not be
compatible with facts; since as a matter of fact, a man, even though
horn in a particular country, does not follow its usage when he lives
elsewhere, or even though a man may be living in a certain country, he
does not adopt its practice if he is not born there. If again, the terms
used were ‘the native or inhabitant of such and such a country,’ then
also, in as much as *nativity* and *habitation* are always uncertain,
this also would not be right; neither *nativity* nor *habitation* is
fixed to the same extent as one’s *caste* or *qualities* or *race*. Thus
there being no such term as would infallibly single out the performers
of the acts in question, they should he taken as to be performed by all
men; so that there is no such thing as ‘local usage.’ The same reasoning
holds good regarding ‘family usage’ also.

“If this is so, then how is it that *smṛti-writers* mention ‘local
usage,’ ‘family usage’ and ‘caste-usage’ as distinct from one another?”

It has been already explained that the restriction of the acts concerned
is for temporal purposes; and in this sense the restriction regarding
acts is quite reasonable.

‘*Family*’ is a part of ‘race.’ The duty that is laid down for the
entire *race*,—such as people of the Vaśiṣṭha-race shall not mix with
those of the Viśvāmitra-race,’—are to be regarded as binding, since
race-names are fixed for all time.—(46)


