+++
title = "047 अधमर्णार्थसिद्ध्यर्थम् उत्तमर्णेन"

+++
The rules that are applicable to all suits in common having been
described, the author now proceeds to lay down those relating
specifically to each of the several kinds of suits.

The man who receives money from another person on the understanding that
at some other time he would re-pay it with interest is called the
‘*debtor*’; and he who lends the money on the understanding that he is
doing it with a view to being repaid with interest is called the
‘*creditor*.’ These two are relative terms.

‘*Money from the debtor*’;—from the context it is clear that this phrase
stands for what is due to the creditor; and the ‘*recovery*’ of this
means its repayment to the creditor. The second ‘*artha*’ stands for
*purpose*, ‘for.’ Thus the meaning of the whole is that—‘when the king
is prayed—petitioned to—by the creditor to the effect that he may be
pleased to make the debtor repay what he had borrowed from him,—then the
King *shall make the debtor pay the money to the creditor*.’

‘*Dhanika*’ is *one who has money*; and it is the creditor who is
called, in ordinary parlance, ‘*Dhanika*.’ In view of the verb ‘*make to
pay*.’—the right case-ending to use would have been the Dative, yeṭ iṭ
has not been used, because the man has not yet become the actual
*recipient*. We have similar usage in such expressions as ‘*ghnataḥ
pṛṣṭham dadati*’ (the man offers his back to the striker), ‘*rajakasya
rastram dadāli*’ (makes over the clothes to the washerman); in neither
of these cases have we the Dative ending, because there is no
transference of ownership; and in the absence of such transference, the
act of *giving* is not completed.

The question arising as to whether the King is to make the debtor pay
simply because the creditor says it is his due, the answer is *no*,—he
shall make him pay only what is *proved to be due*;—*i.e*., only when
the King has assured himself, by indubitable proof, that, the man does
really owe the amount; or ‘*vibhāvitam*’ may be taken to mean
‘admitted’; since the method to be employed regarding *disputed* debts
is going to be laid down below, under verse 52.

“But how can ‘*vibhāvita*’ mean *admitted?*”

There is no force in this objection; it is quite possible that he may
have forgotten about the debt, but on being shown his own writing (on
the deed), he comes to admit it himself; so that though he did not admit
it before, he comes to admit it afterwards; or it. may he that even
though knowing all along that he did borrow the money, he might
dissemble in the beginning (before the producing of the document).—(47)


