+++
title = "048 यैर् यैर्"

+++
It is going to be laid down later on that when the debtor is forced to
repay the creditor’s dues, a certain percentage has to be paid to the
King by the debtor, by way of penalty; so that it might be possible for
the King to fall into the temptation of decreeing, without having
recourse to other possible means, the creditor’s suit and thereby adding
to his own income; in order to guard against thiis \[this/thus?\], we
have the present text.

The King shall make the debtor pay up, by those means,—going to be
described—by which the creditor may receive his money;—‘*saṅgṛhya*’
‘*having determined*,’ *i.e*., having ascertained that ‘by such and such
moans alone would the creditor receive his due.’ Or the root ‘*graha*’
in ‘*saṅgṛhya*’ may be taken as denoting *persuasion*.

The term ‘*uttamarṇika*’ is the same as ‘*uttamarṇa*,’ ‘creditor’;
*i.e*., he who has the ‘debt,’ ‘*ṛṇa*,’ to his ‘*good*,’ ‘credit,’
‘*uttama*’; the word being formed with the affix ‘*ṭhan*,’ according to
Pānini 5.2.115; similarly with the other term also (‘*adhamarṇikah*’).
Money advanced for the earning of interest is called ‘*ṛṇa*,’ ‘debt’;
and there are two parties to it, the giver and the receiver; for the
giver the debt is *to the good*, ‘*uttama*,’ as in the matter of giving
it and receiving it he is an independent agent; for the receiver on the
other hand, it is *to the bad*, ‘*adhama*,’ because it is a source of
trouble to him or account of his having to pay interest on it.

These explanations however are offered only by way of explaining the
literal signification of the terms; in reality, they have their
denotation as referring to the *giver* and *receiver*—fixed purely by
conventional usage.

The next verse explains what are the ‘means’ referred to in this
verse.—(48)


