+++
title = "049 धर्मेण व्यवहारेण"

+++
(*a*) ‘*Dharmeṇa*,’ ‘*by means of good faith*’;—*i.e*., receiving little
by little;—‘so much to-day, so much to-morrow, so much the day after
to-morrow;—just as it behoves him to maintain his family, so also is it
his duty to help me,—I also am a member of his family and as such a
sharer in his wealth,’—the use of such language constitutes ‘*good
faith*.’

(*b*) The man who has absolutely no property should be made to repay the
debt by ‘*tactful transaction*’; on the same principle on which, for the
purpose of drawing out water from the ear one puts more water into it,
the creditor should advance to the debtor more money, in order to enable
him to have recourse to agriculture or trade or some other means of
acquiring wealth, and then receive from him the wealth thus obtained.
The ‘*vyavahāra*’ that consists in filing a suit before the King is not
what is meant by the term as used hero; since one should have recourse
to this only when all other means have failed, and as such it is
included under ‘force.’

(*c*) When, even though possessed of the requisite wealth, the debtor
does not pay in a straight manner, he should be made to pay by means of
‘*trick*’; *i.e*., under some such pretext as that of a
marriage-ceremony or some such occasion, he should borrow from him a
bracelet or some such ornament, and not return it until the debt has
been cleared off.

(*d*) ‘*Moral pressure*’;—by giving up food and constantly sitting at
the man’s door and so forth.

(*e*) ‘*Force*’;—presenting one’self before the King’s court; where the
King shall have the man called quietly and by inflicting some punishment
make him pay up. The ‘*bala*’ of the text does not mean the creditor’s
strength in the shape of his relatives and wealth, etc.; because of the
maxim that the ‘force’ or ‘strength’ of the subject lies in the King,
which has been propounded in connection with the present context.

Others have explained the verse ṭo mean that by the means here
enumerated the *King* shall have the debt repaid;—and their reason for
saying so lies in the fact that it occurs in the context dealing with
the duties of the King. The sense of the verse thus is that ‘when the
amount claimed has been either admitted by the debtor or decreed by the
court, the King shall make him pay it up by these methods;—and he shall
not, all at once, have the entire property of the debtor handed over to
the creditor; since the kindly treatment of both parties constitutes the
King’s duty: and if the debtor’s entire property were handed over to the
creditor, his whole family would perish, and this would not be right. To
this end we have the declaration—‘Without absolutely ruining him, the
debtor should he made to pay little by little, according to his income,
specially so in the case of the Brāhmaṇa,—when the King is righteous.’
So that the man should be made to pay the principal along with a small
amount as interest; but in the event of the man possessing wealth more
than what is needed for the maintenance of his family, he should be made
to pay the entire amount of the claim; and if this be not possible, then
‘the debt shall be liquidated by service, etc.’ (8.177).

In the former explanation, the creditor shall not have recourse to
‘trick’ or ‘moral pressure,’ without notifying the same to the
King.—(49).


