+++
title = "052 अपह्नवे ऽधमर्णस्य"

+++
When, in a court of justice, the debtor is asked by the King or the
judge to repay the debt to (lie creditor,—if this is followed by
‘*denial*’ or evasion by him,—then the ‘*complainant*,’—*i e*., the
lender of the money, the creditor—shall ‘*produce a witness*’ who would
prove his case ,—‘*or adduce other evidence*’—in the shape of a
document, etc.

The term ‘*deśa*’ (lit. *place*) indicates the man present at the place
(where the money was lent); and though the term ‘*kāraṇa*,’ ‘evidence,’
stands for all forms of evidence, and as such includes the *witness*
also, yet here it should be taken as standing for ‘evidence other than
witnesses,’ according to the maxim of ‘the cow and the bull’
(‘*Go-balīvarda*’ where the term ‘go,’ being applicable to both the cow
and the hull, is taken to mean the *cow* only); so that the phrase
‘shall adduce evidence’ must mean ‘shall adduce *other forms* of
evidence.’

Or, the reading may be ‘*abhiyukto diśeddeśam*,’ and the meaning of this
would be as follows:—The debtor, on being asked to pay, answers the
claim by saying ‘it is true that I borrowed the money from him, but I
paid it hack’; and when this happens, the man who was the *complainant*
becomes the *defendant*, and on being thus made the defendant, he should
*question the debtor regarding the place*— at what place did you repay
the debt’?—as also regarding the *time*,—the mention of ‘*place*’ being
only by way of illustration;—‘*or he shall adduce other evidence*’ ‘(of
non-payment)’; *i.e*., he should say ‘I have got other means of proving
my claim’; or it may mean that ‘if he is unable to produce the witness
he should show why ho is so unable’; and in this case the particle
‘*vā*,’ ‘or,’ should be taken to mean ‘*ca*,’ ‘and.’—(52)


