+++
title = "056 ब्रूहीत्य् उक्तश्"

+++
This verse is found to state what has been already mentioned in the
foregoing verses. The use of such repetitions has been already explained
on the ground that wholesome advice should be repeatedly driven home.

The meaning of the words of the text is as follows:—The plaint having
been filed and duly expounded by the complainant, when the defendant is
asked to make his statement regarding the matter of the plaint, if he
does not make a statement, even though repeatedly asked to do so;
*i.e*., he who, having no proper answer to make, does not give any
answer at all, thinking that if ho gave an unsuitable reply, his defeat
would be certain, whereas if he kept quiet, it would be doubtful, also
fails in his suit.

The time-limit in connection with the filing of the answer is going to
be laid down (under 58)—‘If he does not file the answer within *three
fortnights, etc*.’ When the man is suddenly dragged to the court, since
he does not know what the complaint against him is, he cannot find the
right answer at once, and hence it is only right to grant a
postponement, but when the law fixes the time-limit being fixed at
‘three fortnights,’ what is meant is that so many days are to be granted
to the defendant, who proceeds to file portions of his answer within
five, ten or twelve days,—and not that he is to keep absolute silence
for such a long time. As for the law that allows of more time,—*e.g*.,
in the text ‘In some cases he may wait for one year, when there is
non-understanding’ (*Gautama*, 13.28),—this should not be followed in
practice; because if ‘non-understanding’ is sufficient cause for delay,
why should it cease to be so after the lapse of one year only? Nor can
there be any certainty as to the man, who does not grasp the plaint
during one year, being able to grasp it after that time. Hence the
postponement granted should he just for that period of time which may he
regarded as a fair interval for the understanding of the suit and the
finding of the answer. So that no more time shall be granted than what
may be considered sufficient for a man of oven dull intelligence for the
said purpose.

As regards the plaintiff, it is only right that he should file his
plaint on the same day (that he presents himself before the Court); as
he already knows that ‘such and such a man owes me such an amount,’ or
that ‘such and such a man has done me this wrong’; and he takes action
also entirely upon his own choice. So that when the man is setting forth
his own case, why should he have a doubt upon any point (for the
clearing of which he should need time)?

As for the defendant, on the other hand, he does not know anything about
the complaint, when he is suddenly hauled up by the King’s officers; how
then can he have any definite notion regarding either the plaint or the
answer? He is in fact called upon to understand the plaint and find its
answer at the spur of the moment; otherwise he would not be a
‘defendant’ at all.

Thus then, for the Plaintiff, it is necessary to complete his plaint, in
regard to the case he has to prove, on the same day; or he may be
granted two or three days. Both these views have been accepted by other
*Smṛtis*:—*e.g*. (*a*) ‘The complaint should be always prepared with a
definite idea of the ease and its proofs,’ and again: ‘He may strengthen
his case for ten or twelve days’; and (*b*) ‘The plaintiff shall
immediately set forth his case in writing’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*,
7).

As for the view that ‘postponement may be granted for one year,’ there
is no authority for it, and as such it cannot be accepted. We cannot
always assume the presence of Vedic texts corroborative of such
Smṛti-texts as bear upon judicial proceedings,—in the same manner as we
do in the case of the *Smṛti* texts dealing with the *Aṣṭakā* -offering;
because the judicial proceeding is not of the nature of an *act* to be
done. In fact, we have already shown that such assumption is not
possible in the case of matters amenable to other moans of knowledge
(than verbal authority).

This postponement of the complaint is not to be granted in all cases;
since it has been laid down that—‘In the case of heinous crimes, of
theft, of assault, of charges in connection with cows, of wrong done to
the life and property of women, the defendant should be made to answer
the charge at once; in other cases the time has been declared to be
allowable according to the wish of the Court’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*,
12). In the case of heinous crimes and the rest, if a long postponement
were granted, then, during the interval, the defendant might propitiate
the other party. It is for this reason that *immediate answer* has been
required. Specially as in such cases, there can be no lapse of memory or
other causes that would justify the postponement of the answer; because
as a rule charges of heinous crimes are laid before the King
immediately, for the simple reason that in such oases there is great
urgency. For instance, in the case of the theft of clothes, there is
always the chance of its former colour being altered during the
interval. Then again, in such cases such witnesses as may have happened
to be present by chance would he immediately available, while (if
postponement were granted) they would have gone to other places, and, as
their name and caste, etc., would not he known, they could not be traced
and found. So that there would naturally be absence of requisite proof.

Further, in the case of non-payment of debt and other matters, the
parties may settle it between themselves, in which the King cannot
interfere; for when the case has been amicably settled, it is no
business of the King’s to enquire how much of the claim has been paid.
As for the criminal, on the other hand, it is the duty of the King to
punish him, even though he may have come to terms with the plaintiff.
For these reasons, the conclusion is that there shall he postponement
only in the case of non-payment of debt and such cases, while in the
case of crime, etc., immediate answer shall be demanded. To this end wo
have the following declaration—‘In the case of non-payment of debt,
etc., postponement may he granted, for the purpose of finding out the
truth, as disputes on such matters are intricate, and there is
possibility of the defendant being incapable of supplying the answer at
once, or of his having forgotten the facts of the case’;—and the meaning
of this *Smṛti* text is that in a case, where the plaint happens to be
an intricate one, it is only natural that being so intricate, it cannot
he grasped Jut the spur of the moment,—and every one cannot remember,
after the lapse of a long time, all the details clearly and in the
correct order, in order to be able to offor a suitable answer.

‘*And does not prove what he has asserted*,’—*i.e*., having put forward
the case he has to prove, he fails to establish it, because he has no
proofs, and not because he has no opponent (against whom he would have
to establish it).

‘*Who does not grasp the precious and subsequent statements*’;—this has
been already explained (under 53).

For the said reasons, the person fails in the matter of the suit;
*i.e*., is defeated.—(56)


