+++
title = "057 साक्षिणः सन्ति"

+++
The term ‘*jñātāraḥ*’ stands for *witnesses*. Having said that ‘I have
witnesses,’ he is ordered—‘name them’; thereupon, if he does not name
them, indicating their residence, name and caste;—then, on each of the
above-mentioned grounds, he should be regarded as having failed.

‘*Dharmasthaḥ*’ is one who has been appointed to try cases,—the Judge;
and he should pronounce him to have failed, saying ‘this man is
non-suited.’

Just as one loses his case by the other party adducing proofs
establishing the contrary of his contention, so does he lose it also by
the absence of proofs in support of it; and this absence of proofs is
ascertained by the fact of their not being adduced by the party at the
right time, even though repeatedly asked to do so,—as also by the
adducing of proofs to the contrary.

‘*Jñātāraḥ*’ ends in the ‘*tṛn*’ affix; and as such it should govern a
noun in the Accusative case, the use of the Genitive being precluded by
Pāṇini, 2.3.69.

The right reading being ‘*hīnam tam*’—the particle ‘*iṭi*’ should be
taken as denoting *kind*;—the sense being—‘on these, and on other
similar grounds, the Judge shall declare him to have failed’;—if, on the
other hand, the particle ‘*iti*’ he taken as referring to the whole
sentence, then the correct reading would he ‘*hīno’-sau*’; because the
whole sentence being the object of the verb, there would be nothing to
justify the use of the Accusative ending (in ‘*hīnam tam*’).

These grounds of defeat are infallible, unlike the aspect, gestures,
etc. (of the parties), which are fallible.

If at the time of the enquiry, a party does not present himself,—or oven
though presenting himself, does not offer any answer,—then it becomes
certain that there are ne grounds for the man succeeding in his suit. If
the King were not to non-suit the party who never offers an answer, then
the entire judicial machinery would become upset.

As regards the man not perceiving the inconsistency between his first
and subsequent statements,—this has to be treated on the same footing as
*gesture* and other indicative signs. In the case of a man who
throughout is very talkative and bold and clever, gestures and other
indicatives are not infallible guides; and being similar to indirect
verbal indicatives, they are only regarded as corrobarative of the
decision regarding defeat or victory taken on other grounds.—(57)


