+++
title = "059 यो यावन्"

+++
In a case where on the strength of other proofs it has boon decided that
the creditor had lent only 5,000, while the sum entered in the document
is 10,000; from this it is understood that, the creditor has been
dishonest in his dealings, having thought that, as other kinds of
evidence would be admissible only for one year, he would get what he
would prove by moans of the documentary evidence only; and being found
to be dishonest, he should ho fined double the amount. But in a case
where there may he a doubt as to whether the fraud had been committed
intentionally, or only through carelessness, the fine shall be only ten
per cent.

Similarly in the case of the defendant also. It is not that if he denies
the whole claim, the tine shall be ten per cent, and if he denies it
only partly, then double the amount. As a matter of fact, when they are
found to be dealing dishonestly, they shall he fined double the amount;
while if their behaviour is found to be due to either negligence or
poverty, the fine shall be only ten per cent.

When ‘*one*’—*i.e*., the debtor—‘*denies the debt*,’ and when the other,
*i.e*., the creditor—‘*falsely*’—dishonestly—demands it;—then both
these, the creditor as well as the debtor would be ‘*proficient in
dishonesty*,’ and should be fined ‘*double the sum*’;—‘the sum’ standing
for what is denied; so that the sense is that the fine shall be double
the sum that was denied.

The addition of the term ‘*proficient in dishonesty*’ indicates that the
penalty is imposed for proved dishonesty.—(59)


