+++
title = "062 गृहिणः पुत्रिणो"

+++
‘*Householders*’—persons who have married; the term ‘*gṛha*,’ ‘house,’
standing for *wife*. Through fear of trouble falling upon their wives,
these men do not act dishonestly; there are many who may be indifferent
in regard to consequences to themselves personally, and may give false
evidence, thinking thus—‘I shall save myself by going away to some other
country, or even in this country I shall hide myself and acquire wealth
and friends’; but when they have a family they have fears regarding the
family and, setting aside all ideas of fleeing away and keeping
themselves safe, and, in the best interests of the family, desist from
dishonest dealings, through fear of punishments being inflicted upon
their family.

‘*Men with sons*;’—through love for their sons, such men shun all
dishonest dealings; and further, people who have no wife and children,
even though they may be quite honest, may not be available (meettai th)?
of the evidence being taken; because such people do not have any fixed
abode.

‘*Maulāḥ*,’ ‘*respectable natives*’;—this also is open to the same
explanation. The terms stand for *natives born in the country*; these,
being afraid of committing a sinful act among their own people, do not
tell lies. the term ‘*maula*’ denotes ‘those who command *mūla* or
respect’; but this is only an explanation of the denotation of the term;
and the nominal affix denotes *nativity*. Men born in a country
generally live there; so there is no incongruity in this.

‘*Men of the kṣatriya, vaiśya and śūdra castes*,’—not the Brāhmaṇa, as
for him, constant study and teaching have been prescribed,—or the daily
offering of the *Agnihotra* offerings; so that if the King were at a
distance from him, and he were summoned to appear before him, it would
load to a dereliction of his duty; and it is with a view to guard
against this that he is not mentioned as fit for being cited as a
witness. But if the Brāhmaṇa happens to know all about the case, and
there are no other witnesses, and the case is an important one,—then he
is the most important witness. It is with a view to these latter cases
that the exact form of question for the Brāhmaṇa-witness is going to be
laid down:—‘This Brāhmaṇa shall be examined by being asked *to speak*’
(verse 88 *below*).

The term ‘*yoni*’ (in the compound ‘*kṣatra-viṭ-śūdra-yonayaḥ*’) is to
be construed with each of the preceding terms; the meaning being ‘those
of whom the kṣatriya is the *yoni* or origin,’ *i.e*., those of the
*kṣatriya* caste; or the right explanation of the compound may be with
the Ablative—‘*kṣatrāt yoniḥ janma yasya*,’ ‘he whose birth is from the
*kṣatriya* caste.’

These persons become competent witnesses only when the suitor
declares—‘these are my witnesses.’ Those who come and volunteer to give
evidence are not real ‘witnesses.’

‘*Except in emergencies*’.—Some people have explained that the
‘emergency’ meant here is the *absence of other witnesses*. But this is
not right. Because untruthfulness is the only thing that disqualifies
one from being a proper ‘witness’; and this disqualification does not
cease, simply because other truthful witnesses are not available. We do
not mean to say that the phrase (‘except in emergencies’) permits the
admissibility as witnesses of such persons as have been definitely
declared to be disqualified, or of those who have reasons to depose
falsely, or those who are interested in the case; all that we mean is
that in the event of no other witnesses being available, the saving
clause permits the calling of such Vedic scholars and other persons as
may be conversant with the facts of the case, whose summoning might
interfere with these religious practices,—and not of admitted
liars.—(62)


