+++
title = "063 आप्ताः सर्वेषु"

+++
‘*Trustworthy*,’—who never say what is not in conformity with facts; who
always state facts as they are actually seen; with regard to whom people
never have any suspicion of being liars.

‘*Fully conversant witḥ morality*’;—who are always engaged in the
performance of their religious duties, and who know them; *i.e*., who
act up to all that is enjoined in the Veda and in the Smṛtis and
sanctioned by usage, and who know everything regarding what leads to
heaven and what to hell. Such people, perceiving that the telling of
lies will lead to hell, are afraid of untruth.

‘*Free from avarice*,’—*i.e*., of magnanimous temperament, not liable to
regarding a little wealth as much.

Each individual witness should he possessed of all these qualification;
these are stated as subsidiary to the act of giving evidence; and
*combination* is always intended in regard to what are subsidiaries.

‘*Of all castes*’;—that is to say, there is no restriction regarding
castes. As regards the rule relating to the restriction of castes, that
we shall explain later on. The meaning of the present text therefore is
that ‘men of any caste, according as they be available, should ho cited
as witnesses by all suitors.’

‘*In all suits*,’—such as non-payment of debt and the rest.

Those who are the ‘*reverse*’ of those specified above ‘*should be
avoided*.’— Though as a matter of fact, when specially qualified persons
have been specified, there is no possibility of the admission of those
who are the ‘reverse’ of them,—yet the preclusion is in accordance with
popular usage: ordinary men are often found to assert one thing and deny
its contrary (in the same sentence); *e.g*., they are found to say—“an
operation alters a material substance, *and not what is not material*.’
Further, the chief qualification of witnesses is *truthfulness*; and
this cannot be ascertained in its positive form; in fact it can be
ascertained only negatively, by finding out that the man *does not*
pervert truth; this latter again is not perceptible because what the
‘non-perverting of truth’ means is the *telling of truth*, and in regard
to what cm only be *heard* by the ear, bow can there he any
*perceptible* cognition of the truth of what is stated by the words? If
the facts were perceptible, there would be no need for seeking for any
witnesses. And in regard to all things cognisable by means of words,

there is no amenability to any other means of cognition. So that it is
only when it is found that in a certain person all those conditions are
absent which are found to be conducive to telling lies, that the
veracity—*i.e*., his incapability to pervert truth—conies to be
inferred. Thus it is with a view to indicate this that we have the words
‘*the reverse of these should be avoided*.’—(63)


