+++
title = "064 नाऽर्थसम्बन्धिनो नाप्ता"

+++
The following persons are named, as showing those persons in whose case
causes for telling lies are likely to be present.

Among these are (1) ‘*interested persons*’ —*i.e*., persons standing
related to each other in the relation of the creditor, the debtor and so
forth. If a person loses a ease through the deposition of one who
happens to be his debtor, he is likely to become enraged at that very
time and to press the debtor for immediate repayment of the debt; in
view of this the debtor is likely to be swayed by a desire to keep the
creditor pleased; and as such he cannot he a witness. Similarly, in a
suit filed by the debtor against some one, his creditor would be swayed
by the consideration that if the penniless suitor won his case, he would
he able to repay his own dues; and as such he would he likely to depose
falsely in his favour; for this reason he also cannot be a true witness.

Or, ‘*interest*’ mean *purpose, object*; thus persons who have some end
in view,—who stand to gain from either party,—or from whom either party
is likely to gain something—are called ‘*interested*’—their interest in
the case being similar to that of the parties themselves.

‘*Relations*’—friends and relations knowing the insand outs of the
case,—*e.g*., paternal and maternal uncles, etc.

‘*Helpers*’—those who have stood security and others similarly situated.

‘*Enemies*’—what these are is well known.

‘*Persons of proved corruption*,’—those who have home false evidence in
other cases, or who have committed other forbidden acts.

‘*Afflicted with disease*,’—*i.e*., those affected by serious,—not
paltry-ailments; this is what is implied by the term ‘*afflicted*.’
Those labouring under such afflictions are likely to lose temper, to
forget things and to perjure themselves.

‘*Corrupted*,’— those who have committed a mortal sin, or have
repeatedly committed minor sins. the term ‘*of proved corruption*’ is
meant to refer to those who hare been convicted of, and punished for, a
serious crime. Such persons are no longer regarded as ‘*corrupted*,’
because they have been brought under discipline by having paid to t he
king the penalty for their sin.—(64)


