+++
title = "065 न साक्षी"

+++
At the time that one is lending out money, the king should not he made a
party to the transaction by being requested to the effect ‘yon shall he
my witness.’ Because if the king gave evidence, people would suspect him
of partiality,—being all-powerful as he is; and tin’s would lead to the
detriment of the interest of one or the other;—nor would it be proper to
question the king in the same manner as an ordinary witness. Though
being an inhabitant of the same place, the king might corroborate
statements by means of written notes, yet what is forbidden is his
appearance as a regular witness of the ordinary class.

As for craftsmen and the rest, they should not be made witnesses for
fear of injury to their business. These men live by the good-will of the
people; and it is human nature that though men know (that their case is
false), yet the mere consideration that they are losing it leads them to
bear a grudge against the witnesses and others; and thus the universal
goodwill of the artisan and the rest becomes lost, further, in as much
as these men are of mean nature, they are prone to being diverted from
the path of honesty, and hence becoming partial.

As regards the ‘*Vedic scholar*,’ what is denied is not his
trustworthiness, but the propriety of his appearing as a witness; just
as in the case of the king. Because the foot of the man being a ‘Vedic
scholar’ does not deprive him of his trustworthiness; on the contrary,
it only intensifies it to a special degree; and (his for the same reason
that *Vedic scholarship* has never been found to be the instigator of
perjury.

Similarly with those that follow.

‘*Craftsmen*’—those that make a living by some crafts; such as cooks and
the like.

‘*Actors*’—dancers, singers and so forth.

‘*Vedic scholar*’—one who studies the Veda; the person meant here is one
who is always engaged in Vedic study. Or, ‘Vedic scholarship’ may be
taken as indicating *the performance of religions rites*; and in that,
case the prohibition would apply to one who is engaged in such
performance;—the work of the witness being prejudicial to such rites.

‘*One in holy orders*’—the Religious student. As for those who merely
wear the badge of the Wandering Mendicant, or of the heretical
orders,—these are inadmissible on the ground of their following the
heretical scriptures.

‘*One toko has renounced attachments*’—This stands for those
householders who have ‘renounced the Veda.’ ‘*Attachment*’ means either
the repeated enjoyment of sensual objects, or the undertaking of acts
for ordinary worldly purposes—.(65)


