+++
title = "066 नाऽध्यधीनो न"

+++
‘*One wholly dependent*’:—this term is applied by usage to the horn
slave and such other persons who are entirely subservient to other
persons.

Others read ‘*adhyādhīna*,’ which means a *prisoner*.

‘*One under pupilage*’—the son or the pupil (of either party), who is
entirely under the sway of the Teacher. Or the term ‘*vaktaryaḥ*’ may he
taken as standing for one whose body has been deformed by leprosy or
some such disease.

‘*Dasyu*’ here stands for the servant engaged on fixed wages,—so called
because he ‘accomplishes work’ (), as explained by the followers of the
Nirukta. Since such a servant is engaged on daily wages, he is not
absolutely dependent on others; that is why he has been mentioned
separately. As persons belonging to this class live upon the wages
earned, they would become deprived of their livelihood (if they deposed
against their employer); and further, as their living is small, they are
liable to corruption, hence untrustworthy also. As for the *thief* or
*robber* (who also is called ‘*dasyu*’), as he is mentioned by a
separate word (in the next verse), he cannot be taken as spoken of here
by means of the term ‘*dasyu*.’ Or, the term ‘*dasyu*’ may stand for a
*hard-hearted person*, one of cruel disposition.

‘*Vikarmakṛṭ*’ is one who adopts an occupation forbidden by the
scriptures; *e.g*., the *Brāhmaṇa* adopting the occupation of the
*Kṣatriya*, or the *Kṣatriya* that of the *Vaiśya* and so forth.

‘*Too old*.’—One who is too old is subject to lapses of memory.

‘*Minor*,’—one who is too young and not yet entered business.

‘*A single person*’—in as much as ‘at least three’ has already been laid
down,—which leaves no possibility of citing a single witness—the
prohibition of ‘a single person’ is to be taken as permitting under
certain circumstances, the citing of *only two* witnesses. Otherwise, in
a case where, it being laid down that a document must be attested by
three persons,—people might be led to think that if the third attestor
is not present, the other two persons may *write*, but they are not
admissible as a ‘witness.’

‘*Person belonging to the lowest class*’— the barbarian, the *Caṇḍāla*
and so forth. These are percluded here, because they might be regarded
as admissible by reason of their having their origin in the Śūdra-caste
(who is permitted in verse 60).

“*One with defective organs*’— with his perceptive faculties rendered
defective by bodily disease.—(66)


