+++
title = "068 स्त्रीणां साक्ष्यम्"

+++
In the case where both plaintiff and defendant are males, the evidence
of females is not admissible; when however the suit lies between a male
and a female, or between two females,—there women do appear as
witnesses. But there is no restriction as to women alone—and no
men,—being witnesses for women. In fact it is only in suits relating
entirely to males that woman are admissible as witnesses only in special
cases, since the only reason that is given for excluding women is their
fickleness, but there are some women who are as truthful as the best
propounded of the Veda and as steady.

‘*For twice-born persons similar twite-born men*’ As for the twice-born
person of the higher class, and hence more trustworthy,—he may make
certain statements whose veracity may be doubted,—and hence his words
are not absolutely reliable. In fact the witness should be one who is
accepted by the parties as reliable; and this is possible only when he
belongs to the same class; as it is only men of the same class who by
reason of living in the same place are expected to know all about one
another’s transactions; while for others, it would be difficult to come
into sufficiently close proximity with men of the lower strata; which,
on the other hand, is always available for men of the same class.
Similarly for men of inferior qualities, men of the same kind are to be
witnesses; though this does not mean that persons with higher
qualifications are not admissible.

The ‘*similarity*’ here meant may be—(*a*) in caste, or (*b*) in
occupation, or (*c*) in qualities, or (*d*) in action, such as the
studying of the Veda and so forth, or (*e*) in character.

But all this restriction is not meant to be applicable to very important
suits; because as a rule much reliability is not found in men with
inferior qualifications.

‘*Far men of the lowest class*’—such as the *Caṇḍāla* and the rest—men
of the same low class. The compound ‘*antya-yonayaḥ*’ is to be expounded
as those who have their *yoni* or origin in the lowermost stratum.

This is meant to be only illustrative. The same rule holds good
regarding other classes of people,—such as craftsmen, actors and so
forth,—for whom also the *witnesses* should be ‘*similar*’—in caste,
occupation, character, etc.; though these have not been mentioned in the
text; because the same reason is present in their case also.—(68)


