+++
title = "070 स्त्रियाप्य् असम्भावे"

+++
The mention of ‘*woman*’ thus permits departure from the rule laying
down the sex of the witness; that of ‘*minor*’ and ‘*aged person*’ that
prescribing his age; and that of ‘*pupil*’ makes an exception in favour
of relations in general;—this being mentioned only by way of
illustration, indicating the admissibility of persons similarly
circumstanced; hence the restrictions regarding caste or position also
are not to be strictly observed. But dear friends, or enemies or persons
of proved dishonesty.are not admissible in any case; nor any one in whom
there is suspicion of the presence of motives for telling a lie, or
those who have been found to be unreliable. Those however who have been
found to be only slightly unreliable, but otherwise endowed with
superior qualifications, may, in some cases, serve as witnesses. On this
point we have the following assertion—‘There may be one man among a
thousand who would not tell a lie, under the influence of friendship or
enmity or some other interested motive.’

In the event of other witnesses not forthcoming, *even a woman* ‘*may
give evidence*,’—this clause being construed from the preceding verse.

‘*Pupil*’—indicates tutorial and sacerdotal relationship in general.

‘*Relative*’—this term makes an exception in favour of what cannot be
avoided; the sense being that even though the man may bear some
relationship to the parties, if he is not very nearly related, he may be
admitted. Hence the cousin, the uncle, the brother-in-law and such other
near relatives should not he made witnesses, the name ‘relative’ being,
in ordinary usage, applicable to these persons.

‘*Slave*’—indicates the relation of *ownership* in general; that is why
the master, the teacher and the priest are not to be made witnesses in
any kind of suit. The term ‘*slave*’ stands for the born slave and
‘*servant*’ for one who serves on wages.

“The minor and others have been excluded on the ground of
incapacity,—they are incapable of realising what is *evidence*, because
of their mind being fickle and undeveloped; so that any exception in
their favour, oven in connection with emergencies, cannot he right. For
certainly even in an emergency they do not acquire the right capacity.
In fact, such an exception would he similar to the case where a man
having said ‘fresh rice shall not he cooked,’ adds ‘but if there is no
fire it shall be cooked?’

There is no force in this objection; as it is in view of these
considerations that we have the next verse.—(70)


