+++
title = "071 बाल-वृद्धातुराणाञ् च"

+++
The meaning of this is as follows:—

The present verse is not meant to admit such minors and others as are
either in absolute bondage or with disordered minds,—and hence entirely
inadmissible. If it did so, it would be laying down something wholly
new. The persons indicated by this as admissible are, in fact, those who
are capable of understanding things, but whose minds are not quite
steady. And what is meant is that the words of such persons should be
fully examined with the help of reasonings, and they should be admitted
as reliable only if it is found that they speak coherently and are not
tainted with any suspicious signs of corruption. This is what is meant
by the words—*In the event of their deposing falsely the judge should
make up his mind regarding the speech being irregular*. That is to say,
the falsity of the deposition should be deduced from its
*irregularity*;—this ‘*irregularity*’ consisting in the *incoherence of
the statements* and *the absence of explicitness and clear utterance*.

All this is meant to indicate the condition of the minor and other
persons; the meaning being that those who have been reduced, either by
age or by disease, to a condition in which desiring to say one thing
they utter something quite different, and that also indistinctly, should
not be made witnesses. This ground for inadmissibility as witness can
always be ascertained by direct perception; the other grounds,—such as
the presence of love or hatred or avarice and so forth,—can be found out
only by investigation; as has been already declared.

‘*So also* *in the cate* *of* *men with disordered minds*,’—*i.e*.,
those who are inherently of unsound mind.—(71)


