+++
title = "074 समक्षदर्शनात् साक्ष्यम्"

+++
“It has already been said (under 69) that evidence may be given by any
person who may be ‘cognisant of the facts of the case’; why then should
any inadmissibility be suspected, in view of which it is now said that
evidence on the basis of what is seen and heard is admissible?”

Our answer is as follows:—It has been said that the witness shall be
warned by the person who he is going to file his suit, saying—‘you shall
be my witness’; so that people might think that if a person has not been
so warned, he shall be inadmissible; it is in view of this that the
present declaration has been made. The meaning is that if a person
happens to be close by when a certain transaction is being gone through
and is cognisant of the facts, he is admissible as a witness, even
though ho may not have been warned by the parties, saying ‘you will
please bear in mind this transaction between us.’

The term ‘directly’ has to be construed with ‘*what, is seen*’ as also
with ‘*what is heard*’; so that if some one bears of a fact from one
person, and from the former some one else hears it, then the person who
has heard of it at second hand is not admissible as a witness; as it is
only on hearsay, and not on the basis of any direct source of knowledge,
that the man would know that ‘this man has committed such and such a
crime,’ or that ‘he owes such and such a sum to that man.’

‘*What is directly seen*’—means direct knowledge of the facts of the
case, bearing upon loan-transactions, assaults and so forth; *i.e*.,
when these occurrences are actually wen with the eye; or ‘*directly
heard*’ in the case of *verbal assaults*,—such as ‘I shall take away
your wife,’ and so forth,—and such admissions by the debtor as that ‘I
have borrowed such and such a sum from that man,’ and so forth.

Though the root ‘*dṛśi*,’ ‘to see,’ denotes all forms of *apprehension*
(and as such includes auditory perception also), yet ‘*what is heard*’
has been mentioned separately for the purpose of filling up the metro.
All that is meant is that ‘a person who has a right knowledge of the
facts is admissible as a witness’; and the phrase ‘*what is seen*’ is
meant to stand for all valid kinds of knowledge; so that what is known
by inference is also regarded as ‘known’; similarly also all trustworthy
Revelation, which is an authoritative means of knowledge in regard to
imperceptible things also.

The second half of the verse is merely re-iterative, the telling of
truth having been already enjoined before, and the fact of the liar
losing both spiritual merit and worldly prosperity being already known
from other sources of know ledge.—(74)


