+++
title = "079 सभान्तः साक्षिणः"

+++
‘*In the court*’—inside the court room; the compounding being in
accordance with Pāṇini 2. 1.40;—those who have presented themselves at
the place of the trial; should he questioned ‘*in* *the presence of the
plaintiff and the defendant*’—both;—they being ‘*gently exhorted*’ in
the manner described below,—not addressed harshly; because if addressed
harshly, they would become frightened of the judge, and thereby losing
the normal condition of their mind, they would he unable to recall all
the details of the case; because fright always deprives people of their
memory.

‘*Prāḍvivāka*’ Investigating ‘*Judge*’ is the name given to the officer
appointed by the king to try cases. Though the name, in its literal
significance of ‘questioning and judging’ applies to the king also, yet
we find the two names used separately, in such texts as—‘If the Minister
or the *Judge* (Prāḍvivāka) should pervert the details of a suit, the
*king* himself shall look into it, etc.’ (*Manu*. 9.234.)

In the term ‘*prāḍvivāka*,’ ‘*prāṭ*’ means *one who questions*,
‘*pṛchati*;’ it being derived from the root ‘*prach*’ to ‘question’ with
the nominative affix ‘*kvip*’; the elongation of the vowel and the
change into ‘ṭ’ being analogous to the case of the roots ‘*vaci*,’
‘*śri*,’ ‘*dru*’ ‘*śru*,’ ‘*pru*.’ ‘*Prāṭ*’ is the qualifying epithet to
‘*vivāka*,’ which means ‘one who judges or investigates knotty legal
cases’;—the nominative affix ‘*ghañ*’ being added in accordance with
*Pāṇini* 3. 3. 113, and the change of ‘*ca*’ into ‘*ka*’ being in
accordance with ‘*Pāṇini*’ 7.3.52. the term *prāḍvivāka* thus means the
*questioning or Investigating Judge*.—(79)


