+++
title = "085 मन्यन्ते वै"

+++
The particle ‘*na*’ is misplaced.

‘*Sinners*’—perjurors and others—‘*think*’—feel—that ‘*no one sees
us*’;—the particle ‘*iti*’ shows that the whole clause is the object (of
the verb ‘think’);—the construction of the clause being ‘*na naḥ kaścit
paśyati*.’

‘*The gods*’—named in the next verse—‘*see them*’; as also their own
sinner soul. This is what is meant by the assertion that ‘the soul is
the soul’s witness.’

“But who is it that commits the sin? And who apart from him is the one
that *sees*? In fact it is the soul itself that does all that is good or
evil, and certainly there is no other ‘inner personality’ that sees it.”

True; but the same soul has been represented as a ‘god,’ and as such
spoken of as the doer of the act (of *seeing*); and this has been done
for the purpose of preventing the man from telling a lie, the sense of
the exhortation thus is—

‘You know that the real nature of your true personality is *divine*,
which is within the body, while your exterior body is not your
soul;—hence, for the nourishing of this latter, do not commit a single
act;—hence too *do not disregard or despise your soul, the best witness
of man*. Other witnesses give evidence only in this world, while the
soul hears evidence even after death; hence one should be afraid of such
a witness.’

The liar may be led to think—‘when I am born again with another soul,
what will my present soul, which is the seer, be able to do to me?’ But
this is not so; since ‘*the soul is the soul’s refuge*’ (verse 84).
Apart from his soul, there is no refuge for man; and there are not two
souls for a single man.

Others hold that the difference is that the soul spoken of as the
‘*witness*’ is the supreme one, while the souls born in the persons of
the world are those that are under his sway.—(85)


