+++
title = "098 पञ्च पश्व्-अनृते"

+++
The compound ‘*paśvanṛtam*’ is to be expounded as
‘*paśunimittam-anṛtam*,’ ‘false evidence regarding animals,’—on the
analogy of the compound ‘*śākaparthivaḥ*.’

False evidence destroys five relatives;—this ‘destroying’ consists in
making them fall into hell;—the five relatives being—(1) the father, (2)
the mother, (3) the wife and (4-5) a couple of children (son and
daughter).

“How can the result of sin committed by one accrue to another?”

Our answer is that it is on account of association that one person goes
to heaven or to hell, by virtue of the virtuous or vicious acts
committed by another.

What is really meant is that the perjurer is abandoned by the said
relatives;—or, that ho incurs the sin that would accrue from the killing
of the relations; and hence even though not actually killing them, he is
described as ‘destroying’ them, on the ground that the spiritual effect
of the two acts is the same.

This however is a purely hortatory exaggeration; and it is not meant
that the man actually commits the act; if this latter were meant, then
the man would be subject to the expiatory rites prescribed in connection
with the actual *killing* of the said relatives; while as a matter of
fact, the perjurer is subjected to only those sites that have been
prescribed in connection with the sin of *perjury*.

The gradual increase in the number (of relatives destroyed) is meant to
indicate the increasingly heavier character of the expiation necessary;
and the statements are not meant to be taken as literally true. Hence
all that is meant is that each succeeding act of perjury (mentioned)
makes the man liable to a heavier expiation than the preceding one.

On being questioned as to the person to whom a certain slave belongs, if
the witness deposes falsely,—it is a case of ‘*false evidence regarding
men*.’— (98)


