+++
title = "099 हन्ति जातान्"

+++
*Question*—“How can association with the sinful person affect those not
yet born,—that it is said that *the man kills the born as well as the
unborn?*”

It has been already pointed out that all this is merely a hortatory
exaggeration.

‘He kills all by deposing falsely in regard to land; never tell a lie
regarding land’;—this direct form of address has been adopted for the
purpose of indicating the gravity of the offence.

*Question*—“What is it that is called *Land*?”

*Answer*—It is what is known as globe, the earth with hilly
protuberances, extending to the ocean.

*Objection*—“But who can be the owner of all this extensive earth? Who
too can take it away by force? For there is no king over the whole
earth. To this effect there is the earth’s song addressed to Viśvakarman
Bhauvana,—the latter term being his name derived from his father’s—‘no
mortal can give me away’;—which means that there is no one who owns the
entire earth,—‘I shall sink into the midst of the water, having heard
that he is desirous of haring intercourse with me,’—this sinking within
water implying the futility of the gift,—‘vain is thy promise to give me
away’—‘just as what Is thrown into the water becomes useless, so also is
your promise to give the Earth to Kaśyapa useless.’ (*Śatapatha
Brāhmaṇa*, 13. 7. 1. 15). The meaning of all this is that the earth is
the common property of all men, to be equally enjoyed by all; and kings
are appointed only for taking care of it. Thus then, cither the *giving
away* or the *taking away* of the whole extent of this earth being
impossible, how can there be any disputes regarding its possession?”

*Answer*—True; but, just as the entire earth is spoken of as ‘*bhūmi*,’
‘*land*,’ so also are Holds, villages and platforms and over these
latter, ownership is certainly possible; and the *making over* or the
*taking away* also of such ownership is directly perceptible; the
‘taking away’ of this consists in asserting ownership in an improper
manner; and the mere dismantling of a house or the cutting of a tree
does not constitute the act of ‘taking away.’ Hence if a man walks over
another man’s land, or takes clay out of it, ho is not said to ‘take
away the land.’

“But the *Mīmāṃsakas* have declared that ‘It cannot be the land, because
it is common to all’ (Jaimini, 6. 3. 3) \[where the word ‘land’ stands
for the whole earth\].”

But the term is found to be used in the sense also of *parts of the
earth*, by the revered Kṛṣṇadvaipāyana, who has declared as follows, in
course of the description of the duty of charity—‘On the earth the king
should permit the duty of charity by others also; this is a sacred
treasure laid down for kings’ \[which refers to the gift of land\]. As
for the assertion of the Mīmāṃsakas regarding ‘land’ being ‘common to
all,’—this refers to the entire globe, to roam about over which all men
are equally entitled, and which therefore, cannot he *owned* by any one;
how then could it be given away? In accordance with this view, villages
and towns can be given away at the *Viśvajit* sacrifice. Others however
quote the words ‘they present as sacrificial fee, the *bhūmi with the
exception of the platform and the wife’s room*,’—and explain, that,
since any such exception would not be applicable to the entire earth,
the giving must refer to *fields* and such other parts of it only.

In view of the term ‘*vadīḥ*’ (singular) in this verse, the words
‘listen, gentle sir’ (of verse 97) should he taken as addressed to the
*witness*, and not to the *pupil*.

All the words in the second person contained in verse 88 onwards (up to
92) are meant to be addressed to the *śūdra* witness, as is clear from
the gravity of the offence indicated, and also from the similarity in
the verbal forms used;—while from verse 93 onwards are to be addressed
to all witnesses. That such a break in the construction is intended is
shown by the adopting of a different verbal form;—the Second Person is
used in the former set of verses while in the latter we have the Third
Person, which clearly indicates dissociation from the previous
context.—(99).


