+++
title = "104 शूद्र-विट्-क्षत्र-विप्राणां यत्र"

+++
There is the general prohibition.—‘one shall not speak a falsehood’; and
the present verse declares that this prohibition applies to cases other
than that entailing the death of the *Śūdra* and others; and it does not
actually enjoin the telling of falsehood. For if it meant the latter,
then any coordination between this and the said general prohibition
would he impossible.

“What is the condition meant to refer to what is asserted here? the
phrase *in that case* cannot be taken as indicating that *condition*; as
this phrase qualifies *death*; and as death is not existent at the time,
it could not be the required *condition*; for if it were, the meaning
would come to be that ‘when the death has been brought about, falsehood
should be spoken’; and this is not what is meant.”

The term ‘*where*’ referring to the *case*, the phrase ‘*in that case*’
also would refer to the same. Hence the meaning comes to be that—‘in a
case where the party defeated becomes liable to death’; and this
certainly can serve as the required condition.

As for the *king’s wrath*, this cannot he regarded as the required
*condition*; as it is an uncertain factor, and also because any penalty
inflicted entirely through wrath would be illegal.

For all these reasons the only right course is to take the text as
supplementary to the prohibition of lying.

In connection with Gautama’s test, there is no chance of its being taken
as an injunction of lying; for all that it says is—‘there is nothing
wrong in lying, if a man’s life is dependent upon it’ (13.24).

In the face of such prohibitions and sanctions, it depends on the will
of the man whether he shall tell the truth or untruth; so that arguing
in his mind that by telling the truth, he becomes the cause of the death
of the accused, and hence the transgressor of the law that ‘one shall
not kill any living being,’—the man decides to tell the untruth; and in
this he does what is quite reasonable.

*Question*. “All that the man does is to answer the question that is put
to him; he does not kill; and without killing, how can he be tainted
with the sin of *killing?*”

*Answer*. The man being free to say what he chooses, if, on account of
his deposition, the accused comes to be killed by the king, he does
become a *means* of thaṭ killing, and hence its *perpetrator or agent*.

*Question*. “Every kind of *means* does not become an *agent*, *e.g*.,
when nobility is acquired by wealth, or “fame by learning,” wealth and
learning are the *means* but not the *agents*. What makes a certain
thing the *means* is its capacity to bring about a special kind of
effect in the form of substance or quality. Even when an action is
spoken of as such an effect—*e.g*., in the assertion ‘cooking is done by
fire’—the action that is spoken of by the verbal noun (‘cooking’) is in
its *accomplished* form (and hence as good as a *substance* or a
*quality*; since an *action* is that which is still *in course of being
accomplished*). But the effect spoken of in the present context is of a
totally different kind—scriptural or spiritual, and not temporal,—being
brought about by what is declared in the scriptural texts; and the
*Agent* of such an act is not of the same character as that of the
former. If the character of the *Agent* were to consist in *command and
prayer*—which mean *ordering* and *requesting*,—then, in the case of
such assertions as ‘make the corns become hot,’ the use of the causal
form would he impossible, as it refers to the corns, which are *not
sentient* (and hence cannot have any *command* or *prayer* addressed to
them).”

All this has already been answered by the commentators, who have
explained that in such cases the action of the principal agent is
imposed upon (represented as belonging to) the subordinate (insentient)
agent. Such imposition upon insentient objects we find in such
expressions as—‘alms-begging affords shelter,’ ‘the dry cow-dung
teaches,’ and so forth. In such cases, the help accorded (in the shape
of *lodging* and *teaching*) is not by the insentient things (*begging*
and *cow-dung*), but by a different agent, who is the real *instigator*
of the acts. the act of teaching, for instance, is prompted by the
Injunction of having recourse to a Teacher; and when the teacher is
doing this act of teaching, he is hampered by cold and such other
hindrances; and this cold is removed by the dry cow-dung (being burnt as
fuel); thus it is that the action of ‘teaching’ itself comes to be
imposed upon the cow-dung. An ‘agent’ or an ‘instigator’ is so called
because of the *impelling* or urging done by it; and we do find such
*impelling* being done also by such insentient things as wind and water,
in reference to the burning of fire and floating of wood (respectively).
And in all such cases as there can be no *directing*, etc., done by the
Fire, the words would have to be regarded as used in a figurative sense.

If again the character of the ‘agent’ be hold to consist in doing
something conducive to the act in question,—then this could only he in
accordance with the actual action of the Agent concerned, which action
would be in the form of *preparing* for the main act; for one who
*arranges* for an act is said to *hate it done*; when for instance, for
a person who is going to dine, one man brings up the dish and another
serves the rice and so forth; similarly when a man is going to do the
act of killing, one man offers him the weapon, while another, by
recounting the misdeeds of the man going to ho killed, kindles the rage
of the person going to kill him. In all such cases, though each of these
other abettors does not do any directing or urging, yet, in as much as
he helps to bring about conditions favourable for the fulfilment of the
act concerned, becomes a sort of an ‘agent’ in it, in the sense that
what he actually does is conducive to the said act.

According to this view, the cow-dung and the Teacher would stand on the
same footing (as agents in the act of *teaching*).

But in this connection also that principal instigator is the ‘Agent’
without whom the act cannot be accomplished and who does not fall within
the category of any other particular case-relation. Without the readier,
the cow-dung itself cannot become a prompter of the teaching; while the
teacher can do the teaching, even without the cow-dung, and hence the
cow-dung becomes the subordinate factor. As for those things that are
definitely recognised as the ‘instrument,’ or such other factor
conducive to the accomplishment of an act,—these also would he clearly
subordinate. For instance, when one sees a man going to a remote village
again, even on slight business, he says ‘the horse *makes* Devadutta
*go*.’

*Question*.—“As a matter of fact, in connection with the nomenclature of
the case-relations, there is no reference made to the greater or less
intimacy of the determining relation; what difference then is there
between the cow-dung and the Teacher (so far as the character of the
nominative agent of the act of teaching is concerned)? The. distinction
that you have drawn between the two is a mere gratuitous assumption of
yours, and there is no reality behind it; while all Injunctions and
Prohibitions refer to realities. Further, it has also been declared that
‘the exact nature of case-relations is determined by the wish of the
speaker.’ Under the circumstances, if a certain speaker wishes to speak
of a nonagent as the agent, the Injunctions and Prohibitions relating to
the Agent could become applicable to him. For instance, when enunciating
the Sins, manu himself mentions ‘the buyer, the seller, the cooker and
the server’ (ns the *killer* of the animal whose flesh is eaten). From
this it is clear that the maxim that you have propounded is meant for
the purpose of lending support to the position taken up by yourself, and
it does not touch the reality of things.”

It is for this very reason that the commentators have agreed that if the
mere doing of something conducive to an act were the condition of being
the ‘agent,’ then every kind of cause (of the act) would have to be
regarded as ‘agent.’ So that when one gives food to a man, and this man,
being a glutton, happens to die by over-eating,—the man who gave the
food would become the agent in the act of killing. As a matter of fact,
however, the action of the feeder has not been prompted by the idea of
killing the man; it was prompted by the idea of a totally different act,
in the form of *feeding*, and not in that of *killing*; nor was it
prompted by hatred or jealousy or any such feeling. So that oven though
the man may have helped to bring about the death, yet he does not become
the ‘agent’ of that act. That is all that we have to say. In a case
where one takes away lands or gold, etc., belonging to another person,
and the latter dies through grief caused by the robbery,—it has to be
considered whether the robber becomes the ‘agent’ in the act of *robbing
only*, or in that of *killing* also.

“What is then to be ‘considered’ in this connection? The relation of
Cause and Effect can he ascertained by infallibility; and the robbing of
land or gold is not an *infallible* cause of death, to the same extent
as striking with the, sword or starving is.”

What sort of ‘infallibility’ is meant here? It may he held that if by a
certain thing, some one dies, while others do not,—then the agency or
causal efficiency of that thing (towards bringing about death) would be
regarded as ‘fallible.’ But any such principle would be defective, on
account of the divergence in the constitution of men. One and the same
medicine is found to be beneficial to a man of phlegmatic constitution,
but harmful to another. In fact in the case of all men, the appearance
of now forces is dependent upon such contingencies as those of
disposition, place, time, nature and accessories. In fact in the eases
cited also, the death is dependent upon the wealth and progeny of the
man concerned, as also upon thirst and other living organisms (?). For
instance, if the man robbed is of a very passionate disposition, or
liable to give way to grief, the trouble caused by the robbery becomes
conducive to death. And in such a case can the agency (of the robber in
the net of *killing*) he denied? On the other hand, if the man is
easy-natured, ho ignores the robbery. This same reasoning applies also
to the case of the man who, being obsessed by grief, commits suicide by
having recourse to starvation, falling from a precipice, taking
poison,—laying the blame of it upon other persons.

“But in such cases, in as much the taking of poison and other well-known
causes of death would be present, the wrong done in the shape of robbing
the land, etc., could not be regarded.os the cause of the death.”

But since the man has recourse to the means of death, by reason of being
stricken with grief, caused by the robbery,—the robbery becomes the
indirect cause of the death.

If such be the case, then if some one happens to be aggrieved by
wholesome advice given by a well-wisher and commit suicide, the person
offering the advice would be a ‘murderer.’ Similarly, jealous persons,
withering under the pangs of jealousy, would place the blame of their
suffering upon the wealthy person of whom they are jealous. Likewise,
when a man with unhinged mind dies upon the death of his son or his
loved person,—these latter would have to be regarded as ‘murderers.’ In
the same manner some light-hearted people, on seeing a beautiful woman,
become so affected that, becoming brokenhearted, they lose all
consciousness; and in this case chaste women would have to be censured.
And lastly (in the event of a Brāhmaṇa dying of grief caused by the
death of a loved person) the dead person would incur the sin of having
killed a Brāhmaṇa.

All this would be quite true, if there were no specific injunctions and
prohibitions covering special oases. As a matter of fact however, the
offering of wholesome advice is *enjoined*, while the robbing of what
belongs to another is *forbidden*. It has been thus declared—‘In the
case of people engaged in doing good to others, if there happen
something untoward, no blame attaches to those people; as for example,
in the case of physicians administering medicine.’ This does not mean
that it is only in the case of medicines administered by physicians
producing untoward results that there is no blame attaching to the
physicians,—but in all similar cases; *e.g*., when a cow has become
stuck in the mire, if a man exerts himself to the utmost in pulling her
out with his hand, and the cow happens to die, the man, who tried to
pull her out, is not open to blame. Similarly in all analogous cases.

If a man happens to carry on bis business carefully and acquires much
prosperity in the shape of riches,—if some people happen to burn with
jealousy, that man does not transgress any scriptural prohibition.
Further, an act becomes an object of prohibition only when its causal
efficiency (towards harm) is certain and unfailing; and no definite
deduction can be drawn regarding the momentarily changing mental
aberrations of. living beings; so that it cannot be definitely
ascertained that such and such a person has died on account of the
beauty of such and such a woman. And so long as we can get at
well-ascertained objects of prohibition, it cannot be right to make it
pertain to doubtful cases.

“But in a case where the fact of the man becoming pale and withered in
body, it is definitely ascertained that the cause of his suffering lies
in the beauty of a certain woman,—this woman should either renounce her
chastity and meet him, or else she should be regarded as a murderess.”

Certainly not; even though the causal efficiency (of the woman’s
chastity towards her lover’s sufferings) be duly ascertained, yet
chastity cannot become an object of prohibition; because such a
prohibition would be contrary to a definite Injunction; there is such an
Injunction regarding the avoidance of unchastity; and so long as an
Injunction has room for application in an objection not touched by any
other Injunction, it cannot encroach upon the objective of a contrary
Injunction (so that so long as the prohibition of killing has room for
application in the shape of ordinary murder, etc., it cannot encroach
upon the objective of the Injunction of chastity.)

Some people argue as follows:—“What the injunction of chastity prohibits
is that act which is done under the impulse of sexual passion, and not
that which is done under a righteous impulse sanctioned by the
scriptures. Hence, if the woman has intercourse with her dying lover,
solely for saving his life, being moved entirely by the consideration
that the poor man may lose his life,—she does not, by the act,
transgress the injunction of chastity as regards the dictum that one
injunction cannot encroach upon the objective of another; as the act in
question does not form the objective of any other injunction, being due
entirely to passion. It might he argued that there is no scriptural
injunction sanctioning the act (of the woman meeting the dying lover),
because there is no Smṛti text permitting adultery in such cases, as
there is one sanctioning the begetting of a child from the dead
husband’s younger brother. It is true that if she did not act so, she
would be encompassing the death of the man,—and it is on account of the
prohibition of the act of killing that she acts in that manner. But that
prohibition applies only to the *killing* that is done through the
passion of hatred; while when the woman desists from meeting the man, it
is not through hatred of him, but on account of the prohibition of
adultery. The act too that one may do for benefiting another person,
must be one that avoids the transgressing of all prohibitions.”

In a case where some one asks a man for a certain thing, and threatens
that he would kill himself if the thing is not given to him,—and does
actually kill himself,—the man who refused the request cannot be
regarded as a murderer. For if men were to be so regarded, there would
be an end to all worldly business.—(104)


