+++
title = "105 वाग्-गैवत्यैश् च"

+++
‘*Speech-goddess*’—goddess in the form of speech; the rice boiled for
her is said to be ‘*dedicated* to the speech-goddess’;—Rice not
over-boiled is called ‘*chant*’;—with these they should offer
sacrifices.

We have ‘*carubhiḥ*,’ ‘with half-boiled rice,’ in the plural number, on
account of the plural number in the verb ‘*yajerau*’, ‘*they should
sacrifice*’; and it does not mean that each man shall offer several
kinds of rice. Nor is this offering to be made by several persons
collectively, as is done in the case of the *Vrātyastoma* offering. The
plural number in the present case is exactly analogous to the plural
number in such passages as—‘If it rains, many Brāhmaṇas should offer
*sacrifices*’; and it is not like that in the case of the ‘*kapiñjala
birds*’ (where *at least three* are meant).

In the case in question the lie is told for the sake of helping the
Brāhmaṇa or some such person; and this lying itself is a ‘*sin*’;—the
action of lying itself being a sin. The genitive ending in the phrase
‘*anṛtasyainaḥ*’ ‘sin of lying’ denotes apposition; just as in the
phrase ‘*Dharmakriyā*’ (where ‘*dharma*’ and ‘*kriyā*’ are in
apposition). Some people however hold that ‘virtue’ and ‘vice’ or
‘merit’ and ‘sin’ are *produced by actions* (and do not consist in the
actions themselves); and according to this view in the phrase ‘*anṛtasya
enaḥ*,’ ‘*sin of lying*,’ the terms ‘sin’ of ‘lying’ would not be in
apposition; the ‘sin’ being the *effect* of the lying, and hence
figuratively spoken of as being in apposition with it.

The ‘*niṣkṛti*’ of this sin is ‘purifying,’ ‘cleaning,’—*i.e*.,
expiation.

‘*Best*’—most excellent.

“Why should there be any sin in this case—when it has been declared that
there is nothing wrong in lying under the circumstances mentioned.”

Some people answer this objection by pointing out that the avoiding of
untruth leads to excellent results (even when the telling of untruth may
be permissible): a man may, on the basis of the scriptures, have taken
the vow that throughout his life he would not tell a lie; and if such a
man were to tell a lie for saving the life of a man, he would incur the
sin of having boon false to his vow; and it is in view of this sin that
the present text prescribes the expiation. Even though such acts as the
burning of a house and killing are prohibited, yet they have been
sanctioned under special conditions. Similarly we have (in the preceding
verse) the sanction for lying under special circumstances; hence the
mention of its ‘expiation’ must be regarded as a mere reference (to the
prohibition of lying in general).

*Question*.—“How can a sacrifice be offered to *Sarasvatī* with what has
been *dedicated to the goddess of speech?*” If the rice has been
‘dedicated’ to the Speech-goddess, how can the sacrifice be regarded as
offered to *Sarasvatī*? Or, if the two *Sarasvatīs* (one spoken of by
the name ‘*Sarasvati*, ‘while the other is referred to by the name
‘*speech-goddess*’) combined be regarded as the deity to whom the
sacrifice is offered,—then there arises this difficulty that, as a
matter of fact, the exact nature of the deity of a sacrifice can be
learnt entirely from *words*, and the two names here used are two
distinct words (so that both could not refer to the same deity); for
instance, if the injunction of an offering is in the form—‘the offering
should be made *to Agni*,’—people do not use the other names of
Agni,—such as ‘*Jvalana*’ ‘*Kṛśānu*’ and the like—when actually making
the sacrifice. Similarly when the injunction is in the form ‘one should
offer to *Vāyu*,’—even though it is distinctly laid down that ‘*Vaya* is
*Prāṇa*’—the name ‘*Prāṇa*’—is not used when the offering is actually
made.”

All this is quite true; ‘*speech-goddess*’ is the deity of the
sacrifice,—the nominal affix in the term ‘*vāgdaivatya*’ being
denotative of the deific character; and the deity is not denoted by the
term ‘*Sarasvatīm*,’ which appears with the accusative ending. Because
the Accusative ending denotes the *objective*, while the deity is the
*recipient*, and not the *objective*.

“How then is the term ‘*Sarasvatīm*’ to be construed?”

The present passage is only a hortatory exaggeration, just like the
assertion ‘one should make au offering to Agni, *Agni is all deities*;’
and what the present statement means is that ‘speech-goddess is
Sarasvatī herself, and hence when the offering is made to the former she
is pleased, and it reaches the other also.’

The character of the ‘deity’ is ascertained only through sacrifices; as
in the case of sacrifices offered to Agni, to Prajāpati and so forth
(where the fact of Agni or Prajāpati being the deity is ascertained only
by the sacrifice being offered to them).

Some people explain that what is meant is that the deities are to be
*worshipped*, the root ‘*yaji*’ (in ‘*yajeran*’) signifying the act of
*worshipping*; and the deity worshipped forms the *objective* of the
‘worship’; so that the use of the Accusative in ‘*Sarasvatīm*’ is only
right and proper. There are several such assertions as ‘*he worships the
deity*’ (where the deity is the object of the verb *to worship*).”

This however is not right. As under this view the *deific* character of
*Sarasvatī* will have to be deduced from somewhere else; and such an
interpretation would be contrary to the dictum that ‘the deific
character consists in being the *recipient* of a sacrificial offering.’
This dictum however, being self-sufficient, is highly authoritative.

The real explanation is that the deity to whom a sacrifice is offered is
to be made the recipient of the offering, and also to be meditated
upon,—according to the injunction, ‘One shall think in his mind of the
deity for whom the offering is held up’; so that the deity is also the
object of the act of *meditating*; and the accusative ending (in
‘*Sarasvatīm*’) actually denotes the *objective* itself.—(105)


