+++
title = "106 कूष्माण्डैर् वापि"

+++
The mantras called ‘*kūṣmāṇḍā*’ are found in the *Yajurveda*; with these
he shall offer clarified butter into the fire. The root ‘*hu*’ (in
‘*juhuyāt*’) signifies the act of *giving away to a certain deity*; and
as the term ‘*agnau*’ mentions *Agni* only as the receptacle into which
the offering is to be poured, the deity of the offering should be
deduced from the words of these Mantras themselves. In those cases where
the words of the mantras are not found to be indicative of any
deity,—*e.g*., in the *mantra* ‘*devakṛtasyainasovayanamasi*, *etc*.’
(Yājurvedā, 8.13) *Prajāpati* is to be accepted as the required
deity,—so say the people learned in sacrificial lore. The other
alternative view is that the offering in such cases is to be associated
with those that have already been found to be the ‘deity’ of other
offerings. The author of the *Nirukta* also has declared—‘what others
could be the deity?’ Though there is no deity common to all offerings in
general, each sacrifice has its own materials as well as deity clearly
indicated, sometimes directly, sometimes indirectly through *mantras*.

What we say however is that the *mantra*
‘*devakṛtasyainasovayajanamasi*,’ itself contains the term ‘*yajana*’;
and as ‘*yajana*’ is the same as ‘*yājana*,’ it is the latter that is
the required deity; and as in the case of every *mantra*, there is hound
to be something that is denoted by it, there will always be some words
of the *mantra* that would indicate the required deity.

The verse ‘*ut, etc*.,’ refers to the verse ‘*Uduttamam varuṇa
pāśamasmat*, *etc*.’ (Ṛgveda, 1.24.15); and the epithet ‘*sacred to
Varuṇa*’ has been added in order to exclude the other verse beginning
with ‘*ut*’,—*vis*., “*Ut-tvā madantu stomā*,’ etc. (Ṛgveda, 8.64.1).

‘*With the three verses sacred to the waters*.’—The term ‘*daivata*’ is
synonymous with ‘*devatā*’; and the three verses of which the Waters are
the deity are ‘*Āpohiṣṭhā mayobhuvaḥ, etc*’ (Ṛgveda, 10.9.1). In this
case there is one oblation with each of these three verses and one with
all the three collectively.

The terms ‘*clarified butter*’ and ‘*into the fire*’ have to be
construed with every clause.

‘*According to rule*,’—*i.e*., in accordance with the practice of
cultured people. Hence, in as much as the offering being that of butter,
all the details of the primary sacrifices could not be transferred to
it,—this phrase sanctions the adopting of only such details as the
brushing of the place, sprinkling it with water, examining of the
butter, pouring the oblations with the *sruva* and so forth.

The particle ‘*vā*’ shows that all the offerings mentioned are to be
regarded as optional alternatives.—(106)


