+++
title = "110 महर्षिभिश् च"

+++
This is a commendatory supplement to the foregoing injunction of having
recourse to oaths.

‘*By the great sages*’—*i.e*., by the seven sages, called ‘*Saptarṣi*,’
and the rest;—‘*oaths have been taken, for the purposes of a
case*,’—*i.e*., for the purpose of arriving at a decision regarding
doubtful cases.

In this connection the story recounted by the revered Kṛṣṇadvaipāyana
may be cited as an example. On one occasion when their lotuses had been
stolen, the seven sages swore among themselves—‘he who has stolen your
lotus shall go the way of sinners,’ and so forth.

‘*By the Gods*’—Indra and the rest, also; *e.g*., when Indra was accused
in relation to Ahalyā, he swore many oaths, being afraid of being
cursed.

‘Vashistha’ has been mentioned separately, for the purpose of indicating
his special importance;—he also swore; the term ‘oath’ itself conveying
the sense of *swearing*, the verb ‘*swore*’ should be taken in the sense
of ‘took’; just as we have such expressions as ‘sacrifices a sacrifice,’
‘nourished with self-nourishment,’—so have we also the expression
‘*swore an oath*.’ ‘*Shepe*’ is the third person singular form in the
Past Perfect tense of the root ‘*shap*’ to *swear*.

*Before the king Paijavanu*;—Sudās, the son of Pijavana was a king; and,
during his reign, on being accused by Viśvāmitra in the midst of an
assembly, Vashistha was beset with anger and desire and took the oath
with regard to his being a^(‘)demon’; in the presence of that same king
he had been accused of having ‘devoured his hundred sons’ and hence
being a ‘demon’; whereupon he swore—^(‘)may I die to-day, if I am a
demon!’—this invoking of an undesirable contingency upon himself being
what is called an ‘oath.’ In a case where people swear by laying their
hands upon the head of their wife or children, the ‘oath’ consists in
invoking evil upon these latter.—(110)


