+++
title = "112 कामिनीषु विवाहेषु"

+++
‘*Kāminīṣu*’—‘*Kāma*’ is a particular form of pleasure caused through
the tactile organ; and those who are productive of such pleasure are
called ‘*Kāminī*,’—which is a terra that stands for *wife*, *courtesans*
and so forth. To these if one swears, for the fulfilment of his
desire—in such words as ‘I do not love any other woman, thou art the
queen of my heart,’ etc.,—there is nothing wrong in this; though, if
after meeting the women, and on being asked by her to give a certain
thing, he swears falsely that he would give it to her,—then this is
certainly wrong.

‘*Śapathe*,’ ‘*in swearing*’;—the Locative here signifies the *subject*,
and not the *purpose*. Hence the meaning is that there is nothing wrong,
only in that form of oath which is sworn in connection only with that
single woman with whom the man is in love. If, however, the Locative
signified the *purpose*, then there would he nothing wrong in swearing
for the purpose of robbing others of their property; and in that case
what is declared (in 121 below) regarding the heavier punishment, in the
case of perjury through lust, being ‘ten times’ would not be proper.

Even in the case of the woman, if the man swears falsely in a dispute
with her, relating to other matters,—he commits a sin. Similarly in
other cases.

‘*In connection with marriages*’;—when one says ‘this man has married
another woman,’ or ‘that woman should ho married by you,’ and so forth;
such lying, also in connection with the marriage of friends and others,
is not sinful, but not so the concealing of the real caste of the bride
and such details.

‘*Fodder for cows*’;—when, for the sake of obtaining fodder for cows,
one has been constrained to commit theft, but denies it,—then if called
to bear testimony, if the witness should swear to his not having done
the act,—there is nothing wrong in this.

Similarly with ‘*fuel*.’

‘*For the sake of Brāhmaṇas*,’—for conferring some benefit on Brāhmaṇas.

“Lying for the sake of all castes having been already permitted (in
104), why should this be repeated here?”

Some people offer the following explanation:—In the case of Brāhmaṇas
*false swearing* is permitted, while in that of the Śūdra and other
castes, it is simple *lying that is sanctioned*.

This however is not right; as under 104, it has been declared that ‘such
lying is preferable to truth’; so that what is sanctioned there is not
*lying* at all. The fact of the matter is that the said verse is not a
prohibition; it provides an exception to the prohibition of false
swearing contained in the preceding verse; and hence there should he
nothing wrong in swearing for the sake of any caste.

“Why then should the declaration in the present verse be made?”

What has been permitted under 104 is lying with a view to save the men
from *death*, which refers to all castes; for the purpose of *conferring
a benefit*, however, it is permitted only in the ease of the *Brāhmaṇa*;
as in the case of the other castes, the man might be prompted to lie
also by greed for money and other motives.

In all these oases also the permission of false oath applies to only
those eases where the purpose cannot he served without it, by any other
means—(112)


