+++
title = "116 वत्सस्य ह्य्"

+++
*Question*.— “How can it be that fire shall not burn or that water shall
not throw up? Certainly elemental substances never renounce their
natural functions, being as they are unconscious entities.”

It is in anticipation of this objection that the author corroborates his
statement by means of a commendatory story. Though the matter in
question is one that can he ascertained either by positive and negative
induction, or by direct perception,—yet there may he people who would
regard such phenomena in the same light as a magical performance, and so
would be inclined to take all that is said regarding oaths and ordeals
merely as intended to frighten the person into telling the truth; just
in the same way as verbal threats and angry staring, etc., are used to
make men tell the truth;—and it is in view of this contingency that the
author has cited an instance from the Veda; as there are men who become
convinced of the truth of a statement when it is corroborated by past
occurrences.

*Vatsa* was a sage of the family of Kaṇva; he was ‘*accused*’—blamed—by
his younger step-brother, of being not a Brāhmaṇa, but a *Śūdra*,
whereupon he said—‘By truth, I enter fire, if I be not a Brāhmaṇa’; when
having said this, he entered the fire, ‘*the fire did not burn even his
hair*’;—and why?—‘*because of truth*.’

The question arising as to how fire can know the truth?—the answer
is—‘*fire is the world’s spy*.’ The man who, keeping his real character
concealed, comes to know what is done and what is not done by others, is
called ‘spy,’ known also by such names as ‘*cāra*’, ‘*praṇidhi*’ and so
forth. The God Agni moves within all living beings, and as such, is
cognisant of all that is done or not done. We read in the *Tāṇḍya
Brāhmaṇa* that “Agni is one who lies within the gods as well as the
Asuras;—Gautama, approaching fire, said ‘May you Sir, operate within all
beings’; and then he goes on to say—‘May you Sir, move about here *as a
spy*.’” A similar passage from the *Pañcaviṃśa-Brāhmaṇa* may he
quoted;—“Vatsa and Medhātithi were two sons of Kaśyapa; Medhātithi
insulted Vatsa by saying—‘thou art not a Brāhmaṇa’; and the only remedy
of this was Fire.”

*Objection*.—“As a matter of fact however, it is found that real thieves
are not burnt by fire (when undergoing the ordeal) while innocent
persons are actually burnt. How then can any reliance he placed upon
oaths and ordeals?”

Our answer is as follows:—The principle here laid down cannot be
rejected simply on the strength of a perceptible miscarriage; because
such miscarriages are very rare. In fact, even in the case of perception
and other forms of valid cognition, such miscarriages are met with; and
yet these are not regarded as untrustworthy. Further, it has been
declared that ‘what is found to be wrong does not deserve the name of
Perception, etc.; what is found to ho wrong is not Perception; and what
is Perception is never wrong’; and on the analogy of this statement, it
may be asserted that ‘what miscarries is not an *ordeal*, and what *is*
an *ordeal* never miscarries.’ For what is an ‘ordeal’? It is that
wherein the full procedure is observed, all obstructions in the shape of
spells neutralising the force of the fire and so forth duly examined and
removed; what is contary (contrary) to this is *not* an ordeal.

And certainly an ordeal of the said kind never miscarries. Even though
there be some such miscarriage, it must be regarded as the result of
some past act of the man; in fact even a real criminal comes to be
acquitted by virtue of some previous meritorious act; while an innocent
man becomes convicted by virtue of an evil deed committed in his past
life. The causes leading up to the fruition of past acts are truly
strange. But with all this, it is only in one ease among a thousand that
an ordeal is found to fail; as a rule it is infallible; and it is
exactly the same with the *Putreṣṭi*, the *Kārīrī* and such other Vedic
sacrifices.

From all this it follows that reliance should be placed upon oaths and
ordeals also, just as on witnesses; for these latter also speak falsely
sometimes.

Thus then, what has been said regarding ordeals is not meant simply to
frighten the man. In fact, in the case of the said ordeals, it is the
truth that prevails.—(116)


