+++
title = "131 लोकसंव्यवहारार्थं याः"

+++
*Objection*.—“Such terms as ‘*likṣā*’ (Louse-egg) and the rest,
pertaining to copper and other metals are already well known in the
world; what is the use of propounding a scriptural definition? They
could he learnt from the usage of experienced men, just as the exact
denotation of such words as ‘cow’ and the like is learnt.”

It is in view of this objection that the author has added the phrase
‘*for the sake of business-transactions*’; ‘sake’ here denotes *sphere*;
hence the meaning is that what is adopted as the basis here is usage in
actual business (and not ordinary usage).

“In that case, standing on the same footing as such words as ‘cow’ and
the like, they would he learnt from actual business-usage; what is the
use of setting forth a scriptural injunction?”

The answer to this is that the Injunction is put forth for the purposes
of restriction. There being several other such terms in use in
connection with iron, bell-metal, gold and other metals, it is with a
view to preclude these that the author has laid down the present
injunction; as also for precluding the difference in the measures, which
is met with in certain localities. For instance, in some localities, a
*pala* is regarded as made of 40 *māṣas*, while in others of 64, and in
others again of 108, and so forth. And all this diversity is precluded
and one definite measure is laid down here.

The verse is to be construed as follows—‘*these terms that are used in
the world, I am going to describe for the sake of
business-transactions*,’—so that the business-transactions of all men
may be carried on with the help of those same technical terms; and
incidentally the rules relating to these also would become
clearer.—(131)


