+++
title = "134 सर्षपाः षड्"

+++
“The term ‘*middling*’ is likely to lead to mistakes. If the names here
put forward are meant to be denotative of the size of the objects named,
then the addition of the epithet ‘middling’ has some meaning,—the sense
being that the size of the ‘Mustard’ here meant is that of a mustard
grain which is neither too large nor too small. If, on the other hand,
the terms are put forward as mere technical names, then there can be no
sense in the term ‘*middling*,’—the term ‘barleycorn’ being a mere
technical name (standing for the *grain*).”

This is not right. This is not a prose-treatise, that we should seek for
the justification of every expression used; it is a metrical treatise,
and as such sometimes even irrelevant expressions are introduced for the
purpose of filling up the metre. As a matter of fact, however, there is
some relevancy in the present case; if it were something wholly
irrelevant it would interfere with the comprehension of the sentence as
a whole, and would thereby vitiate its authority. But there is nothing
irrelevant here; the fact is that the ‘barley-corn’ being mentioned in
the *middle* of the entire table of measures—beginning with the ‘Triad’
and ending with the ‘*Śatamūna*,’—the epithet ‘*middling*’ has been
added to it in the sense that the particular measure known as the
‘barleycorn’ occurs in the *middle* of the whole table of measures.

The term ‘*pañcakṛṣṇalika*’ is formed with the ‘*ṭhin*’ affix, the sense
being ‘that which is made up of five ‘*Kṛṣṇalas*.’ If the reading is
‘*pañcakṛṣṇalika*,’ it should be treated as a *Bahuvrīhi* compound,
ending with the ‘*kap*’ affix.

Sixteen of these ‘*guñjā-berries*’ make one ‘gold-piece.’—(134)


