+++
title = "143 न त्व्"

+++
Money-lending is done in various forms—with pledge as well as without
pledge. Pledge also is of two kinds—*to be used* and *to be kept*. That
*to be used* is again of two kinds—(*a*) that in which the profit
consists in some form of product of the pledged article and (*b*) that
which is used as it stands; the milch cow belongs to the former class,
and wrought gold, etc., to the latter.

What is said here regarding the case ‘*when there is profitable pledge*’
refers to the pledge *to be used*.

The ‘*profitable pledge*’ is of various kinds, such as the milch cow,
fields, gardens and so forth.

While such a pledge is being used by the money-lender, ‘*he shall
receive no interest*,’ such as that laid down in the foregoing
verses—‘*on the loan*.’ That is, he who is deriving a profit from the
pledge shall receive no other kind of interest.

In the case of the pledge *to be kept* also, ‘*merely by the lapse of
time*,’—simply because a longtime has elapsed,—even becoming doable of
its former size, and the pledge remains unredeemed,—‘*there shall be
neither transference nor selling*.’ ‘*Transference*’ consists in the
article being duly made over to another person. Even though already
doubled, the principal, even on the transference of the pledge, shall
continue to grow: as is going to be declared later on—‘*sakṛdāhṛta*,’
etc. ‘*Selling*’ is well known. This also shall not be done.

“What then is to be done in such cases?”

The man shall continue to use (derive proñt from) the pledge, till the
principal has become doubled and repaid; when it shall be redeemed. When
the doubled principal has been repaid, the pledge ‘to be used’ shall
cease to be used, and that ‘to be kept’ shall be returned. The pledge
‘to be used’ shall remain with the creditor till the debt is
repaid,—unless there is some damage. If there is some damage done, and
the creditor somehow has become too poor, having no other property
except that pledged article, then, having waited for some time, he shall
report it to the king and sell the article; and from the sale-proceeds
he shall take an amount which is just the double of his principal, and
hand over to a middle-man the balance for being paid over to the debtor.

“But it is declared that—‘if on the principal having been doubled, the
pledge is not redeemed, it becomes lost (forfeited)’ (Yājñavalkya,
*Vyavahāra*, 58)”

This we are going to explain. As a matter of fact, this ‘forfeiture’ or
‘loss’ does.not mean that the former owner entirely loses his ownership,
and the person having it acquires ownership over it. For when there can
be no ‘transference or sale,’ what sort of ‘ownership’ would the man
acquire? Hence, by virtue of the said prohibition of ‘transference or
sale,’ the ‘loss’ or ‘forfeiture’ must he taken to mean that the
creditor who may have ceased to use it becomes entitled to use it again.
Or the term ‘loss’ may he taken as referring to such things as clothes
and the like, which naturally become ‘lost’ (perished) by using; and
which cannot continue to be *used* even when they have lost their
original form,—in the manner in which lands and other such things can
continue to be. It is in this sense that the Smṛti has to be explained.

In fact, the term ‘loss’ has been used in the figurative sense, of
permitting the *use* of it; while the prohibition of ‘transference and
sale’ must be taken in its literal sense; as this latter is not capable
of being understood in a figurative sense. It is in this sense that, we
have another *Smṛti* text to the effect that ‘there shall be no selling
or handing over of pledges, etc., etc.’ What is spoken of as ‘handing
over’ in this text is the same as ‘transference,’ as is clear from its
being mentioned along with ‘sale,’—both of them being similar in certain
respects.—(143)


