+++
title = "144 न भोक्तव्यो"

+++
“It has been already declared in the preceding verse that—‘when there is
a profitable pledge, etc.’—(why then should this he repeated?).”

True; but the case referred to in the preceding verse is that ‘where the
*using* or *profit* is commensurate with the *interest*; when however
the amount of interest is large, while the *profit* is small, if the
creditor uses the pledge by force, he loses the whole amount of
interest. In a case again where the pledge is in the form of land or a
cow or some such thing, and the profit derived from it is not
commensurate with the interest,—if the debtor does not pay the
accumulated interest, and the amount of the principal also has not
become doubled,—all the interest that the creditor obtains is in the
form of the profit derived from the pledge; so that in this case the
man’s interest is to be computed at what he has derived by way of that
profit.

In a case where the pledge is in the form of clothes and other similar
things, which cease to exist, by use, the creditor should ‘*satisfy*’
the debtor ‘*with its price*,’ and himself receive his interest. For, if
he did not pay the price of the pledged article, ‘*he would be a stealer
of the pledge*;’ *i.e.*, ho should ho made to pay that penalty which he
would have had to pay if he had actually stolen an article of the same
kind as the pledge.

‘*Stealer*,’ ‘*stēna*,’ is thief.

Others explain the verse in the following manner:—In the event of
forcible use, there is loss of interest; if the thing is to be used, it
should be so only on payment of its proper price to the debtor; this has
been thus declared—‘the creditor should be made to pay the price of the
thing in gold, in a case where it is used.’

This verse refers to the case where the debtor, at the time of
depositing the pledge, distinctly says—“see that my pledge is not
lost,—do not use it please,—in a few days I shall redeem it,”—and yet
the creditor, not minding this, does make use of the article.—(144)


