+++
title = "145 आधिश् चोपनिधिश्"

+++
‘*Pledges*’—already explained;—‘*Deposit*’—is that which is allowed to
be used through considerations of friendship;— these should not he
allowed to remain for a very long time; they should he redeemed as soon
as the stipulated time arrives.

The time for the redeeming of the pledge is just when the principal,
with accrued interest, has become double; and there is ‘lapse’ of this
time, if the thing is not redeemed then.

For the deposit also, the right time to recover it is before the other
party has occasion to think that the thing belongs to him by reason of
his having the use of it. Beyond this time, there is ‘lapse of time.’

Neither pledges nor deposits ‘*should suffer much lapse of
lime*;’—*i.e*., they should not be allowed to suffer it.

The author explains the reason for this:—‘*They would be liable to
appropriation*’;—if they were allowed to remain longer than the
above-mentioned time, and were not recovered till then, they would he
liable to be appropriated.

For this reason, one should try to redeem the pledge as soon as the
principal has become doubled.

This is merely a friendly advice; as a matter of fact, there can be no
‘appropriation’ of pledges and deposits, by any lapse of time; as it is
going to be declared (in 149) that—‘a pledge..... cannot be lost in
consequence of use’; and it is the same idea that is referred to in the
present text.

Others have held that the present advice refers to *pledges* only,—in
reference to those cases where, even after the principal has become
doubled, the party, through sheer wickedness, goes on wasting time,
under the idea that the principal cannot increase any further,—and it is
not possible to deposit or sell the thing at the time anywhere else,—and
he is urged to this step only through his hatred for the creditor, who
is prevented from earning more interest on his capital. And it is with
reference to such cases that it has been declared that ‘*they should be
appropriated*’ (this being the meaning of the words in this case). That
is, if the man desists from redeeming the pledge with such motives, his
right over the thing ceases. But if one fails to redeem it, for want of
money,—in his case there should be neither ‘transference nor selling’
\[as said above (143)\].

Or the assertion ‘*they become liable to appropriation*’ may he taken as
referring to the case where the debtor desists from redeeming the
pledge, thinking that it lies safest in the custody of another
person.—(145)


