+++
title = "146 सम्प्रीत्या भुज्यमानानि"

+++
‘*Favour*’—friendliness. When such things as the ‘*Cow*’ and the rest
are being used solely through the favour of the owner, they do not
become ‘*forfeited*.’ ‘Forfeiture’ means the passing of the ownership of
the former owner and the coming in of that of the person using them. And
such ‘forfeiture’ does not take place in the case of the cow and other
things being used through favour.

“As a matter of fact, in the case of all *deposits*, there is no
forfeiture by mere using,—as is going to be declared under 149
below—wbat is the special feature there in the case of the cow and other
things (that they should be separately specified)?”

Our answer is as follows:—The denial (in 149) of forfeiture in regard to
deposits is in view of its possibility in accordance with the general
law of forfeiture laid down in verse 147, which would be applicable to
those cases also when the thing has been used for ten years without its
losing its former shape.—So far as the cow and other animals are
concerned, they cannot he articles of ‘deposit’; and hence people might
be led to think that these do not come within the said prohibition (in
149). (Hence the necessity of emphasising the non-forfeiture of these
separately.)

The name ‘milch cow’ is based upon the cow *giving milk*; this condition
can last at best for one year; after which, becoming fit for the bull,
she would cease to be ‘milch’ if she became pregnant; and after this,
there might be an idea that she belongs to this person (who is keeping
her) and not to Devadatta (to whom she really belonged); because what
had been given by the latter for the use of the former was the cow
calved for the ñrst time; and Devadatta allowed the man to use her and
still continued to see her being used, in a form which is not the same
as that of the animal that had been given in ‘deposit’; and hence the
‘deposit’ is that which is to ho used, and the use is not of that thing;
under the circumstances, what sort of a ‘deposit’ would it be? And as
the prohibition (under 149) pertains to ‘deposits,’ and the cow in
question has ceased to be a ‘deposit’,—it was necessary to make a
separate effort for precluding her forfeiture.

As regards the camel and other animals mentioned, after they have been
used for ten years, they become entirely changed in shape. So that-
these also would cease to be ‘deposits’ (in the true sense of the term).

‘*Vahan*,’ (‘ox’) has been taken by some as a participial adjective
(meaning ‘riding’) qualifying the word ‘*horse*,’; they hold that what
is here laid down does not apply to the *ox*. Others again take it as
standing for the donkey, the mule and other beasts of burden.

‘*For breaking in*’—ox and other animals—‘*made over*’—given for that
purpose. Others hold that the present verse serves the purpose of
implying the optional character of the prohibition. In the case of
‘deposits’ other than those enumerated here, there is sometimes
‘forfeiture.’ for instance, when clothes are used through favour and
become worn out, there is ‘forfeiture.’ for when a new clothing has been
handed over for use, and it becomes worn out by use, there can be no
opportunity for the former owner to say—‘Let me have my clothing,—if it
has become worn out, let me have its price and thereby redeem the
deposit.’—(146)


