+++
title = "147 यत् किम्"

+++
‘*Whatever thing being used*,’ etc.—such is the construction, ‘*being
used*’ being brought back to the beginning.

‘*Owner*;’—though this general term has been used, yet the person meant
is the owner of the thing whose use is being ignored.

‘*Whatever thing*’—includes all kinds of property, slaves, slave-girls,
utensils large and small, and so forth; though all this is not usually
spoken of as ‘*dhana*,’ ‘property,’ ‘wealth,’—which name is applied to
gold, silver and other valuable articles.

The moaning of the sentence thus is this:—“When the owner of a property
sees, for ten years, a certain property of his being used by another
person,—and says nothing,—*i.e*., does not file a suit before the king,
nor says to the user before his family ‘how is it that you are using
this thing which belongs to me?’—such a man, after the lapse of ten
years, does not deserve to ‘*recover*’—obtain possession of—that
thing;—*i.e*., his ownership entirely ceases.”

What is meant by ‘*seeing*’ is *knowledge*, and not actual *seeing with
the eyes*; which latter is expressed by the term ‘*in his presence*.’

‘*By others*’—is explained by some to mean *not by collaterals or
relatives*; another *Smṛti* text adding these ‘collaterals and
relatives’ as exceptions to the present rule:—‘when a thing is used by
relatives and collaterals, the ownership does not cease.’

This however is not right; as this explanation would make the rule
indefinite; it being uncertain who are to be regarded as ‘collaterals’
and ‘relatives.’ If ‘relationship’ in general were meant, then there
would be no one left (who would not hear some sort of relationship to
the man). Consequently the text must be taken to mean that the rule hero
laid down applies to all cases where some one else uses a thing
belonging ṭo another person.

In this case however the term ‘others’ would be merely re-iterative, and
as such superfluous. For there is no person to whom the term ‘other’
could be applicable. The wife, the father and the son are all spoken of
as ‘one’s own self;’ specially in such texts as—‘the wife is the half of
one’s self,’ ‘it is one’s own self that is called the *son*.’ Hence
between husband and wife, or between father and son, mere *using* cannot
he regarded as a ground of ownership. In fact in their case also, if
they are separated, when the time of using has arrived, if one does not
use it, this fact becomes a precluder of his ownership. In the case of
the wife’s dowry, if it has been pledged by the husband, her ownership
does not cease by *using*, so long as the husband is alive, and the
reason for this is that she is entirely dependent upon him, and there is
no absolute separation between them; her dowry also has to be looked
after by the husband; and the law also (verse 149) is found to make an
exception in favour of the property of the king, the Vedic scholar, and
women.

The present verse having described the loss of ownership of the owner
who ignores adverse possession, the next verse proceeds to show to whom
the said property passes over.—(147)


