+++
title = "148 अजडश् चेद्"

+++
This verso is supplementary to what has been said (in the preceding
verse) regarding the man not deserving to recover the property—‘*if he
is neither an idiot nor a minor*.’ One who is devoid of intelligence is
called as ‘*idiot*;’ and one who is still a child is a‘*minor*;’ one who
has not reached his sixteenth year is called a ‘*minor*.’

What is mentioned here is only by way of illustration, standing, as it
docs, for those conditions that make one unable to protect his own
interests; such conditions for instance, as disability due to wine or
gambling, protracted illness, being taken up entirely by austerities and
study, want of business-capacity, deafness.

In the case of the property of persons suffering from such disabilities,
even prolonged using does not create ownership in the person using it.

‘*Is used in his country*’.—The term ‘*his*’ refers to the actual owner.
The ‘*country*’ of the Kaśmiri people is Kaśmir, that of the inhabitant
of Pañcāla is Pañcāla. The sense is that—‘if both the owner and the user
are inhabitants of the same country.’

What is meant is that the rule laid down applies to the case of persons
suffering from a disability; all the rest are mere details in the
explanation; as it has been already pointed out that the mention of the
‘idiot’ and the ‘minor’ is merely indicative. Hence the sense is
that—‘in cases where it is possible for the owner to know that his
property is being enjoyed by another, if the latter continues to enjoy
it for ten years, then he becomes entitled to it,—*i.e*., the ownership
passes over to him.’

*Objection*.—(A) “It is not right that *enjoyment* or *possession*
should lead to ownership; on the contrary, it is *ownership* that leads
to *possession*. If *possession* were to lead to *ownership*, there
would be confusion. (B) further, as regards the limit of tea years that
has been set forth, other Smṛti-texts do not admit this in the case of
all kinds of property. For instance—‘in the case of landed property
ownership ceases after *twenty years*, if the owner sees it being
enjoyed and says nothing’—says Yājñavalkya (*Vyavahāra*, 24). Others
again do not admit the passing away of ownership even after twenty years
of adverse possession. They say—‘If one enjoys, without title, a
property even for hundreds of years, he should be punished by the king
with the penalty due to thieves’ (Nārada, 87);—and again, ‘Where
possession is found, but no title for it, the rule is that it is the
title, and not the possession, that should form the ground of
ownership.’ (Nārada, 84).”

Those who hold to the view of possession for three generations (leading
to the passing over of ownership) quote the following text—‘Even in the
absence of title, if a property has been in total possession for three
generations, it cannot be recovered, having passed from one generation
to another for three generations’ (Nārada, 91). And the meaning of this
is as follows:—‘Authority’ means a deed of gift or some such
document;—in the absence of such proof, what has been enjoyed by the
father, grandfather, and great-grandfather, becomes the property of the
fourth generation; and it is not so after twenty years only. Elsewhere
again we read—

‘The best authority consists in a gift-deed, possession accompanied by
title is the second, and possession is the last,—in connection with
immovable property.’ Now, it is in the case of the third generation—and
not in that of father and grandfather only—that ownership would be
established by possession only:—but in his case also it is not
possession during twenty years only. Others again hold that mere
possession—even though extending over a hundred years—cannot be regarded
as a ground for ownership; and in support of this they quote the
following texts:—(*a*) ‘If a person enjoys a property without
title,—even for hundreds of years, he should be punished with the
penalty of a thief’ (Nārada, 87); (*b*) ‘If one man puts forward only
possession, and no title, he should be regarded as a thief’ (Nārada,
86); (*c*) “The law is that it is authority, and not possession, that
forms the ground of ownership’ (Nārada, 84). What has been referred to
above in regard to possession extending over ‘hundreds of years’ (not
being a right ground), is long-extending possession by one and the same
person; and such possession cannot establish one’s ownership, unless
there has been possession by his father and grandfather also.

“But how can one person possess a property for *hundreds of years*?”

There is no force in this objection. Such expressions as ‘hundred
years,’ ‘thousand years’ and the like are used only in the sense of
*long periods of time*; *e.g*., in such statements—‘The man lives for a
hundred years, of hundred glories and hundred organs.’

The upshot of all this is that in the case of the first generation of
the possessor, mere possession, even though extending over a period of
twenty years or more, does not establish *ownership*,—which means that
the son of such a possessor also does not acquire the ownership; and
thus the meaning of the texts is just as is directly signified by their
words.

As a matter of fact, it is not possible for the ‘Title’ of possession to
be remembered for ‘several hundred years’: so that if the production of
such title were insisted upon, kings would come to confiscate all those
properties that may have belonged of yore to temples, Brāhmaṇas,
monasteries and village-communities. As for written land-grants, these
also could not have their writings verified and recognised, after the
lapse of a long time, as actually written by the king’s scribes; and the
grants themselves might be suspected to be forged. Hence long-standing
possession is regarded as indicative of the presence of valid title in
the shape of a gift-deed and the like, and it is for this reason that
possession has been mentioned among ‘proofs’ in the text—‘There are
three grounds of ownership—documentary evidence, witnesses and
possession’ (Nārada, 69),—and not as a ‘ground of ownership,’ which are
mentioned in the text—‘There are seven marks of acquiring property’
(Manu, 10.115), and also in the text—‘Learning, Bravery, Austerity,
Daughter, etc., etc.’

Or the assertion of Nārada—‘If a man enjoys a property without
authority, etc.’—may be taken as referring to a case where there is
suspicion of forcible possession; as in the same context we find the
text—’ (1) Misrepresented Deposits, (2) Stolen goods, (3) Deposits, (4)
Goods retained forcibly, (5) What is obtained by begging, and (6) What
is possessed secretly,—these six are property possessed without title’
(Nārada, 92).

“But this has been already declared in another text:—

‘Deposits, Boundaries, etc.’ (Manu, 8.159, and Nārada, 8).” What these
latter texts refer to is possession during three generations only, and
the text under consideration precludes the propriety of possession
beyond that also; as is clearly indicated by the phrase ‘for several
hundred years.’

In the text under consideration, ‘*anvāhitam*,’ ‘Misrepresented
Deposits,’ stands for an article which is actutally pledged in a form
different from that in which it was shown at the time of the
transaction;—‘stolen goods’ for what is obtained by fraud or by breaking
through a wall at night, and so forth; while ‘forcible retention’
implies the use of force; this is the difference between the two;—the
rest is quite clear.

“If it is only *possession for three generations* that is a ground for
title, what then is the meaning of the text—‘One loses his ownership
over land, if he sees it being enjoyed by another, without saying
anything’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*, 24).”

Some people offer the following explanation:—The text refers to the case
where the man has been in possession of a property for some time, and a
documentary flaw, or some such vitiating element, happens to be
detected,—*e.g*., it is found that it was executed under pressure, or
some letters are found to have been rubbed out, and so forth;—as ‘twenty
years’ is ample time for the ascertaining of the exact nature of the
suspicious document.

Others however explain it as referring to the case where the man offers
the same plot of land as pledge to one person, after having previously
pledged it to another,—and the title of the one is prior to that of the
other; and what is meant is that in such a case, notwithstanding the
priority of the title, greater validity attaches to the ‘possession’ by
the other person, if it has continued for twenty years.

This however is not right; for it has been declared that, when a person
hits accepted a pledge, it means that it has been accepted as ‘deposit’;
and in the case of land, this acceptance implies a desire for
possession; so that in a case like this, the character of the ‘pledge’
becomes established by possession during a short time also. It is with
reference to such cases that we have the declaration—‘What a man is not
possessed of, that is not his own; even though there be documentary
proof and witnesses Ire living; specially in the case of immovables’
(Nārada, 77). The term ‘*specially*’ implies that in the case of cows,
horses, etc., there *is* ownership even without ‘possession’ or ‘use’;
as these latter are not always *used*; and one does not always know what
benefits he may derive from such pledges as these latter. In the case of
land on the other hand, it yields its produce at all times; and hence in
the absence of actual ‘use’ or ‘possession,’ the fact of its having been
‘pledged’ cannot be established.

If the pledger ignores the fact of his having pledged the land to one
person, and offers it to another, even during the period of its
possession by the first pledgee,—and the second pledgee also has
accepted it,—while the former pledgee, either through the distraction of
other business or on account of the distance of the place, has failed to
‘accept’ and take possession of it,—in such a case the circumstances do
not deprive the first pledgee of his right over the land. When, however,
immediately after having received the deposit, the man Is banished by
the king, or is attacked by serious illness, and there is no authorised
person to look after his property,—if the man returns after a long time,
if he can prove his clear title to it, he does obtain possession of the
land, even though in the meantime it may have been pledged to another
person.

Others explain the text as referring to the subject of the revision and
equalising of the shares of brothers, who have separated and divided
their property in unequal shares (twenty years ago); the meaning being
that there can be no such revision after twenty years.

But if this were all that is meant, this should have occurred under the
context dealing with that subject. In fact, a general statement, made
apart from a particular context, indicates that it pertains to other
subjects also.

Others again take it as referring to the case of ‘possession’ where an
uncultivated plot of land has been cultivated by a man; and they declare
that in this case if the possession has continued for twenty years, and
its exact extent has not been checked by means of chains and surveying
instruments,—then all this checking cannot he done after the lapse of
that time.

The revered teachers however explain as follows:—When two men,
inhabitants of the same place, possessing similar powers, similar
natures, equal wealth,—not related to one another,—happen to have the
same interest in a certain immovable property,—if one of them permits
the other to enjoy it during the said time (twenty years), the former
retains no right over the property.

This however would be incompatible with the rule laying down the period
as ‘three generations.’

Thus then, in as much as the various rules bearing upon the subject are
found to be incompatible with one another,—which incompatibility cannot
be set aside by any assumptions,—what has got to be ascertained in each
case is if there is any clear title to ownership,—and in the event of
there being none, if the property is in the possession of another party;
if it is, then the decision must proceed on the basis of such possession
only.

Though there are several kinds of titles to ownership,—such as gift,
sale, pledge and so forth,—yet in the event of none of these titles
being present, if it is shown that there has been possession extending
over twenty years, without break, the right course is to regard it as a
case of ‘pledge.’ Such ownership based upon possession is ephemeral, and
can be set aside if there is deterioration in the property concerned.
(?) Thus it is that possession during three generations creates the
rights of ownership in all cases; possibility of gift or sale, etc.,
also there could be only for one year. So that in the case of possession
for twenty years, there is no incongruity at all.

In a case however where both persons are absolutely without title, and
are asserting themselves by mere force,—the prior possession, even
though of longer standing, is set aside by the twenty years’ possession,
which is more recent and hence free from all suspicion. That is to say,
possession during three generations is set aside in favour of
possession, the exact period of whose duration is precisely
ascertainable.

‘*Becomes frustrated in law*’;—the phrase ‘*in law*’ is added in order
to preclude the notion of its being ‘morally right.’ For if some flaw in
the possession were detected, the possession could be defeated; so that
if the possessor bases his case entirely upon the circumstance that
there is no evidence forthcoming to show that his possession is
fraudulent,—his victory cannot be regarded as morally right; so the fact
remains that the other party loses his case simply on account of the
said possession.—(148)


