+++
title = "149 आधिः सीमा"

+++
‘*Ādhi*’ is that which is *pledged*; an article given as pledge,—such as
cattle, land, gold and so forth,—to the creditor; and recovered from him
(upon re-payment of the debt).

‘*Upanidhi*’ has been explained,—in accordance with another treatise
(Yājñavalkya, 2.65) as a deposit, whose form is not shown and which is
handed over, covered with cloth and sealed. But this being already
included under ‘*deposit*,’ it is better to take the term ‘*upanidhi*’
as standing for what is given for use, through friendliness and favour.

‘*Boundary*’—the boundary-line between villages, etc. It is quite
possible that it being a public concern, men are likely to ignore
encroachments upon it. In the case of houses, the boundary-line, marked
by ditches or walls, two, three or four cubits in size, is common to
both; and if either side of it happens to crumble down in time, as the
matter would be a slight one, even encroachment might be ignored for
some time by a certain person. But since in such matters also the owner
fearing the loss of ownership through gift, etc., his sons or grandsons
do discover some hidden marks of the original boundary and assert their
claims to the recovery of the boundary encroached upon.

‘*Minor’s property*’;—this has been added only by way of illustration;
the *minor* having been already referred to by the name ‘*pogaṇḍa*’ (in
Verse 148).

‘*Women*,’—slave-girls or wife; as no other woman, save these two, have
anywhere been described as ‘property,’ ownership over which could be
lost through possession extending over ten years, as spoken of in Verse
147.

*Objection*.—“But the text (147) does not speak of ‘*property*’ at all;
the expression used is ‘*whatever thing*,’ which refers to *things in
general*.”

No; the use of the term ‘*dhani*,’ ‘*owner*,’ clearly indicates that the
expression ‘whatever thing’ refers *to property*, which, in this case,
is used in the sense of *anything that is used*; and this mention of
women as ‘property’ indicates all kinds of possessions. From this
analogy of ‘property,’ males also, as slaves, are actually regarded as
‘property.’

‘*The king’s propety*;’—the ‘*kings*’ meant here are the rulers of
provinces; the property belonging to such rulers. These people have vast
properties, which they cannot always watch over carefully; so that if
their property were liable to be lost through adverse possession, they
would soon be reduced to penury.

‘*The properly of Vedic Scholars*’—though poor in comparison,—has yet
got to be preserved with care.—(149)


