+++
title = "150 यः स्वामिनाननुज्ञातम्"

+++
It has been declared (under 144)—‘a deposit should not be used by
force,—by using it one renounces the interest:’ and what was meant there
was the absolute appropriation of the entire deposit; and when such
using has been forbidden, it is only right that by using a deposit by
force, the man should lose the entire amount of his interest. By merely
using the article however, the deposit does not become destroyed, it
only becomes deteriorated, in colour, brightness and decorations; and
the present verse lays down that in such cases the man shall lose half
the amount of his interest.

In a case however, where the deposit consists of new and valuable
ornaments or clothes, and on being worn they become spoilt,—there is to
be not merely loss of interest, but the man is to be made to pay the
price of the property spoilt; this is as the matter has been explained
by great scholars.

Ṛju (Yajvan) (?) however has explained as follows:—In a case where
business is carried on by the master as well as by the servant, and a
pledge has been deposited by the servant, and seen by the master
also,—if after some time, the pledger says to the servant—‘I have need
for the article pledged,’—and is permitted by him to use it; whereupon,
if the master, on seeing him using it, cancels the pledge and takes it
back;—in such a case half the amount of interest has to be renounced.

This however is not right; as, under the circumstances, transactions
carried on by the master or the servant stand upon the same footing. So
that when the using has been permitted by one, it cannot be held to be
not permitted by the other and hence illegal. In such a case, it is
actual ‘ownership’ that forms the denotation of the term ‘owner.’
Otherwise, the person who deposits the article would certainly appear to
be the ‘owner’; but the servant is not the ‘owner’; so that if he does
give away the thing, he would be only a thief. For this reason
‘*ownership*’ has to be attributed to him. Hence when the using has been
permitted by the servant, it is treated as permitted by the master also.

For these reasons, the meaning of the verse must ho as previously
explained and the mention of the ‘owner’ is only for the purpose of
filling up the metre.

Between the two terms in the expression—‘*Bhuṅktevicakṣaṇaḥ*,’ an ‘a’ is
to be understood as present in a merged form due to the proximity of the
two vowels (*e* and *a*). That man who entertains the idea—‘my interest
is already safe, so that the use of the article is an additional
gain’—is called here a ‘*fool*’ For no such transaction is sanctioned by
law as would involve both the securing of interest and the using of the
pledged article; hence it is only the interest that should be earned.

‘*Compensation*’—Expiatory price; exchange.

Others have explained the prohibition contained in the present verse as
referring to the case where the pledge is not redeemed, even after the
principal has been doubled; and they hold that the fault, in this case
is comparatively insignificant (hence only half the interest is lost).

But first of all, these persons should be required to point out the
subject of Yājñavalkya’s assertion (Vyavahāra-58) regarding the ‘pledge
becoming lost if it is not redeemed on the principal having been
doubled.’—(150)


