+++
title = "151 कुसीदवृद्धिर् द्वैगुण्यम्"

+++
‘*Kusīda*,’ ‘*monetary loans*’—the advancing of money for earning
interest; or the money advanced may itself be called ‘*Kusīda*’; *i.e*.,
the money which is advanced with the idea ‘having advanced a small
amount I shall get back a larger amount.’

The interest on such loans ‘*shall not exceed the double*—the creditor,
having advanced the money to the debtor, shall receive from him only
such an amount as may be the double of his principal.

“What the text says is that the interest should become ‘Double’; and
this, along with the principal itself, should make the total amount
received *thrice* the principal.”

It is not so; in the term ‘*Dviguṇa*,’ ‘double,’ the term ‘*guṇa*’
signifies *part*; and when we come to look out for a *whole* of which it
would be the ‘*part*,’ it is the *principal* which, from the context,
appears to us as the ‘whole.’ Hence when the text speaks of the
‘double,’ what is meant is the double of the capital advanced. To this
end we have other Smṛti-texts—(*a*) ‘When there is delay, the capital
advanced shall become doubled’ (Gautama, 12. 81); and (*b*) ‘The deposit
is to be redeemed when the principal has become doubled’ (Yājñavalkya,
Vyavahāra, 64).

‘Interest’ is paid in several forms:—(1) when coins are advanced,
interest is paid in coins; (2) sometimes it is paid in the form of
progeny; as in the case of female cattle; (3) sometimes in the form of
the use of pledges, in the shape of cattle, land and the like.

The doubling of the interest is, according to some people, meant to
pertain to those cases where the interest paid is of the same kind as
the capital advanced; and the reason for this lies in the fact that it
is only in such cases that the exact ‘double’ can be ascertained; while
in the case of interest in the form of ‘progeny’ of animals, it cannot
be ascertained whether the ‘doubling’ is to be computed by *number*, or
size or measure; as in the case of such animals as elephants and horses,
it is found that when they are bought or sold, their price depends upon
their size; as a rule animals of larger size fetching higher prices.

“There is similarity of kind in the *progeny* also; the progeny of the
cow is of the same species as the cow. So that there is no justification
for any distinction as that into (*a*) ‘interest of the same kind’ and
(*b*) ‘progeny.’”

The answer to this is as follows:—‘Sameness of kind’ does not depend
only upon belonging to the same species; in fact it depends upon
similarity of age, size and other factors. Hence the distinction is
quite correct. Further, in the case of interest in the form of the *use
of deposits* also, how would the ‘double’ be determined? And when cows
and lands are pledged, the benefit derived from the use of the cow is in
the form of *milk*, while in the case of land, it is in the form of
fodder and other produce; so that in these cases also what sort of
‘double’ would there be? In actual usage it is found that if the
principal gold is not paid, land continues to be used and enjoyed for
hundreds of years. Says Yāyñavalkya (*Vyavahāra*, 90)—‘The pledge
continues to be enjoyed so long as the capital is not paid off.’ \[From
all this it is dear that the limit of ‘double’ cannot he applicable to
all cases.\]

Our answer to this explanation of some people is as follows:—When what
is asserted is the ‘doubling’ in regard to ‘interest’ in general, how
can we restrict it to any particular kind of interest only? When the
words of the text afford a certain meaning in a general form, we cannot
restrict it to any particular case, unless there is some authority for
doing it. As regards the argument that “there can be no *doubling*,’ in
the case of *progeny*,”—ju st please make an effort to understand the
matter: when an animal is pledged, its value is duly determined, and
certainly the value of its progeny also could be similarly determined.
Similarly in the case of the enjoyment of landed property also, when the
fodder and grains become ripened, it can he easily determined when their
value becomes equivalent to the principal.

Then again, the term ‘*Guṇa*’ (contained in ‘*dviguṇa*,’ ‘double’)
signifies *usefulness* also. “in that case what is there that would be
as *useful* as the principal?” It can always be found if a certain thing
serves any useful purpose at all. And if the interest accruing he
computed only at the price obtained from the sale of the grain and
fodder produced from the land,—then also it would be possible for the
interest to become equivalent to the principal,—even though there may be
no exact equality of size and other details.

As for the ‘local custom’ that you have put forward,—that argument has
been answered by yourself, when you called it ‘local.’ further, whenever
there is any chance of customs being abandoned, it is Smṛti-texts that
serve the useful purpose of affording the requisite check.

As regards the text—‘the pledge is enjoyed so long as the principal is
not paid up,’—the phrase ‘so long as the principal is not paid up’ can
he taken to mean ‘so long as it has not become doubled.’ In fact, with a
view to reconciling it with other Smṛti-texts, it is best to take it in
this sense. This has been fully explained by us elsewhere.

‘*Stipulated at one time*’—*i.e*., what has been fixed upon at one time,
in eases of the renewal of the loan. ‘Stipulating’ means *fixing*; and
what is settling by verbal contract is also *fixing*. The loan is
renewed, when the principal has become doubled and is not paid up. Even
after the principal has been doubled, if the creditor is willing to earn
further interest on it, and the debtor also wishes to retain the money
for the purpose of currying on some large business, he renews the deed,
entering as principal, the former principal along with the accrued
interest, and thenceforward it is on this principal that the interest
begins to accrue. And in that case, the principal, even though doubled,
continues to grow further.

It continues to grow also when transferred to another person; for
instance, when the principal has become doubled and the creditor has
need of the money and asks the debtor to pay, the latter takes him to a
third party, and says^(‘)this man will make the payment for me in so
many days’; and in this case during these additional days, further
interest shall accrue. The third party in this case is not a ‘surety’
for payment, but only a ‘trustee,’ the man who actually does the
payment. This is what has been explained by Ṛju to be the meaning of the
debt being ‘transferred to another person.’

Or. ‘transference to another person’ may refer to the following
transaction:—Even before the principal has become actually doubled, if
the pledge is banded over to another person,—when the money with accrued
interest has become doubled, then it is only right and proper that the
pledge should be redeemed; but in this case it is taken away before the
principal has reached the limit,—then, interest begins to accrue from
that date, and the limit of ‘double’ shall be computed upon the total
amount of the principal along with the interest accrued up to the date
of the transference. That is, when the creditor, with the sanction of
the debtor, hands over the latter’s pledge to a third party and receives
his due from him, then the interest continues to accrue.

In both these cases (of ‘transference to another person’), before the
doubling of the principal, the money-lender is, somehow or other, made
to agree to receive payment from another person; or, ‘transference to
another person’ may mean that case where the debtor takes a further loan
from the creditor, but having to go away to foreign lands, transfers the
loan by means of another document.

Ṛju however holds that, except in the case of the same debtor renewing
the loan, no interest beyond the doubling of the principal can accrue.
It is in accordance with this view that he has declared—‘In the case of
transference to another person, there should be renewal of the deed, and
the need for this we shall explain.’

Some people have held the following view:—“The rule laid down in the
present text refers to a case where the whole amount of interest
accruing during the year is *paid at one time* \[this being the meaning
of the phrase ‘*sakṛdāhiṭā* \]; whereas if all the interest that has
fallen due is not paid off wholly, then it will go on accruing, even
beyond the limit of ‘double the principal.’”

But in this explanation, neither the negative particle ‘*na*’ nor the
term ‘*āhita*’ retains its real meaning. For if the interest accrued
during the first year has been received, and at the end of the second
year, the interest is again brought up for payment,—where would there be
any chance of the principal becoming doubled?

“The prohibition of excess may apply to a case where the debtor brings
up for payment the amount of the principal which has become doubled with
accrued interest. Even before the principal becomes doubled, if the
debtor is able to pay up the interest only, he can do so, and there can
be no limit placed upon the principal to be accepted.”

This view also is nothing. When the debtor is ready to pay up, he
deserves favourable consideration, and he should not be made to pay
more; and if a debtor is forced by the king to pay up, it cannot be
right to remit the excess in his case. Nor does the term ‘*āhitā*’ of
the text mean this.

If the word is read as ‘*āhṛtā*,’ then the exact signification of the
term ‘*sakṛt*’ would be doubtful; reason would be scattered to the
wings, and the text would he a self-conceived one, and not the one
propounded by Manu.

From all this it follows, that the most reasonable conclusion is as
explained by us above.

In the case of grains and other things, it does not exceed the
‘*quintuple*’—*i.e*., five times.

Another Smṛti text lays down ‘quadruple’ in the case of grains:—‘In the
case of gold, cloth and grains, the interest is to be double, triple and
quadruple respectively’ (Nārada, 107). And the law on this point is as
follows: If the moneylender has become reduced to poverty, and the
debtor has become opulent with much wealth, having earned much wealth by
means of the grain he had borrowed,—then the interest is to be *five
times*; and in other cases it is to be only *four times*.

‘*Sada*’—stands for the *fruit of trees*,—‘grains’ being mentioned
separately.

‘*Lava*’—stands, among northerners, for *wool*.

‘*Beasts of burden*’—ass, camel, ox and so forth.—(151)


