+++
title = "152 कृतानुसाराद् अधिका"

+++
‘*Anusāra*’ is that which is followed in all matters; *i.e*., the law
laid down by the scriptures. The law in relation to interests is
diverse: one lays down the rate as the eightieth part of the hundred,
and another as five per cent, if the rate of interest is stipulated ‘*in
contravention of*’— in excess of—these sanctioned rates,—it is ‘*not
payable*’—by the debtor to the creditor.—Why?—Because it is
‘*excessive*’—*i.e*., against the law.

In support of this the text puts forward a commendatory
declaration—‘*this they declare to be the usurer’s way*.’ The term
‘*kusīda*’—means *that which is followed by evil persons*; and then the
persons themselves. This ‘*way*’—path, conduct—is of evil persons, and
not of good men. This is a deprecation of the act referred to.

If the lender is anxious to make as much money as possible out of the
transaction, under the impression that the borrower is going to carry on
extensive business with the help of the capital he is going to lend,
then he may obtain *five per cent*., irrespectively of the caste of the
borrower. What is meant is that this is all that he should seek to
obtain.

Another reading is ‘*kṛtā tu sārādadhikā*’; and the meaning of the text
would in that case he that—‘if, at the outset, on account of the man’s
poverty, a low rate of interest is fixed, but subsequently, the man
having acquired much wealth, if, *on account of his
opulence*—‘*sārāt*’—a large rate is demanded, this cannot he payable,
since all that the man is entitled to is *five per cent*.—(152)


