+++
title = "153 नाऽति-सांवत्सरीं वृद्धिम्"

+++
‘*Sāmvatsarī*’—*means* ‘*pertaining to the samvatsara*,’ ‘*annual*’;
what is in excess of this ‘*is atisāmvatsarī*,’ ‘*beyond the annual*’;
the idea of *pertinence* being implied by the nominal affix. Or we may
first form the compound ‘*atisamvatsara*’ in the sense of ‘beyond the
year,’ and then have the vowel-changes, giving the form
‘*atisāmvatsarī*.’

The interest that has been sanctioned in connection with all castes,—at
the rate of 5 per cent, shall be realised for one year, and after the
lapse of the year. Or, the meaning may be that no interest shall be
realised during the year,—and after the year the debtor shall not delay
the payment of interest.

‘*Nirharet*,’ ‘*shall pay*,’—*i.e*., taking out of his own stock, offer
to the creditor; what is paid before the year has expired would also be
‘*beyond* *the* *annual*.’

Or, the meaning may be that at the time of the transaction itself, it
shall be determined whether the interest shall be computed monthly or
yearly. It would not be right for a man desirous of earning interest for
two years, to make the other party accept the loan for that long period
the idea in his mind being—‘what would be the use of earning the
interest for a few months only?—if the principal is allowed to remain
with him for two years, then I shall earn a decent interest.’ In such a
case the man would so arrange the advance to the debtor that the
interest would be paid after two years. That such a course would not be
right is clearly indicated by such texts as—‘one shall neither pay, nor
cause another to pay, interest in such a single instalment as may be
beyond the power of the man to pay.’ In the case of interest payable
monthly, the debtor is made to pay the interest on the second day after
the lapse of the month; similarly when the stipulation is that the
interest shall be paid yearly, it should be paid on the second day after
the lapse of the year,—and not computed by any longer time.

Nor shall he receive what is ‘*adṛṣṭā*’ ‘unapproved’;—*i.e*., a rate not
sanctioned by the scriptures;—*i.e*., rates above 5 per cent., such as
10 per cent., or 11 per cent.

Some people hold that this is only a reiteration of what has been said
(under 152) that ‘an excessive rate of interest is not payable.’

The right explanation of ‘*adṛṣṭā*’ therefore is ‘*unaccumulated*’;—the
meaning being that interest shall not be received by the clay, or by the
month, until it has accumulated during several months.

“But under 142 it has been declared that one may take ‘monthly
interest.’”

What is meant by that is that the interest shall he computed by the
month, and not that it shall be received month by month.

‘*Compound interest*’:—the various kinds of interest from here down to
the ‘*corporeal*,’ should be construed with ‘*he shall not pay*.’ Though
the prohibition is literally addressed to the debtor, yet it is really
meant to be addressed to the creditor; for the debtor, being in
distress,—what is there that he may not do?

Or, what is directly meant by ‘*nirharet*’ is *receiving* itself; so
that the prohibition would he addressed literally to the creditor
directly.

“In as much as the rates of interest have been fixed at 2, 3, 4 or 5 per
cent, there is no possibility of ‘compound interest’ being paid or
received: what then is the need of the present prohibition?”

Our answer is as follows:—This prohibition itself is indicative of the
fact that it is open to the creditor to charge such interest also. Just
as the prohibition that ‘the Brāhmaṇa shall not sing Sāman during
Fire-laying’ is indicative of the fact that though no such Sama-singing
is actually prescribed in connection with Fire-laying, yet it is open to
the priest to do it. Thus the possibility of the various kinds of
interest here mentioned being charged is indicated by this prohibition
itself. For instance, in the case of men carrying on inferior kinds of
business, the ‘compound’ and other interests are actually paid; it is
thus that in connection with traders on land and water, etc., varying
rates of interest have been prescribed: ‘Those trading in forests should
pay ten per cent., those on the sea twenty per cent.; or among all
castes people may pay any interest that has been stipulated among
themselves’ (Yājñavalkya, *Vyavahāra*, 38). ‘Interest stipulated among
themselves’ has thus been sanctioned by this other Smṛti-text among all
castes, in relation to only those that trade in the forest, etc.; so
that ‘compound interest’ is not permissible in other eases.

Interest charged on interest is called ‘*compound interest*,’
‘*cakravṛddhi*.’ Others however explain the term ‘*cakravṛddhi*’ as
‘wheel-interest’; that in the case of wheeled conveyances, like the
cart, etc., interest is paid only for those days on which they are used;
and on days when the man has to go by boat, in the crossing of large
rivers, no interest is paid. In the case of oxen and other things that
are used as conveyances, interest is paid in this same manner and it is
this that is called ‘wheel-interest.’

‘*Periodical interest*’;—“Interest computed month by month is called
‘periodical’”—says a text. But ‘month’ is mentioned only by way of
illustration; what is meant is that interest which is not allowed to
accumulate, being realised day by day, or month by month, and no time is
allowed. Another kind of ‘periodical interest’ is that in which the
creditor has stipulated—‘if you do not pay the interest at such and such
a time, my principal shall become doubled.’

‘*Privately stipulated*’;—when the creditor and the debtor tlx upon a
special rate of interest, in view of each other’s requirements. This
also is possible only in the case of distant traders. As for others, it
has been declared—‘successive interest is not payable’ and ‘he is
entitled to only 5 per cent.’

Or, when what is lent is *gold*, and what is received in interest is
*cloth*—whose real character is that of a *deposit*,—it is a case of
‘*privately stipulated*’ interest; and this would have the character of
usufruct, in the case of what has not been kept as a pledge.

‘*Corporeal*’—payable by bodily labour. This would be possible only in
the case of labourers...... (?)—(153)


