+++
title = "154 ऋणन् दातुम्"

+++
If a man, having his wealth reduced, is unable to pay the doubled
principal, he should be made to renew the contract, and to ‘*change*
*the deed*’—*i.e*., the document properly attested. But he should pay
the interest that has already accrued.

This is an exception to what has been said as to the creditor not
receiving more than double of bis principal;—since the loan-transaction
remains in force.

“How does it follow that there is an exception to the non-exceeding of
the double?”

Because in this case there is nothing to show whether further interest
accrues upon the principal along with the accrued interest, or upon the
principal only; all that is mentioned is the ‘renewal of the contract,’
which is explained in other words—‘he shall *change the bond*.’

“If further interest does not accrue on past interest, for what purpose
should the bond be altered?”

The answer is as follows:—When interest has ceased to accrue, and the
money is not paid, there is every possibility of laxity (on the part of
the debtor), and of the witnesses (of the old document), forgetting all
about the transaction; and a debt thus ignored for ten years would
become non-payable; as has been declared in the following text.—‘Where a
document is ignored for ten years, there can be no suit on its basis;
especially in the case of assaults (?).’

This is how it has been explained by older writers.

The following verse (from Nārada, 131) lays down the favour that the
king may show towards the debtor:

> *If by lapse of time the debtor becomes bereft of the capacity to pay,
> he should be made to pay* *the debt according to hit capacity*,
> *taking into consideration the time and place and the rate of
> interest*.

\[The meaning of this is as follows\]—

If, through evil fate, the debtor becomes reduced to poverty, he shall
not he chastised with imprisonment in the jail and soforth. “What is
there to be done?” Whenever he should happen to have any property at
all, he should be made to repay the debt by small instalments;—this is
what is meant by the phrase ‘*according to his capacity*.’ This is what
is going to be described as—‘the debt should he liquidated even by
bodily labour, etc., etc.’ (8.177.)

In view of this text, the use of altering the bond is just as we have
explained above.


