+++
title = "156 चक्रवृद्धिं समारूढो"

+++
‘I am going to Benares,—my purpose being the acquiring of merit as well
as trading in vessels; and such and such an amount shall be the interest
paid upon the wheeled conveyance you supply’;—this contract having been
entered into, if the man does not actually proceed to Benares, being
forced back with only a little profit, by difficulties in the form of
forests, river-crossings and anarchism,—then he should not be made to
pay the entire amount of interest stipulated; for how can the reward
that would be due to those who have gone to Benares be due to those who
never went to that place? When the oxen go a long distance, it involves
much labour on their part; so that it is right that the reward of their
owner should he commensurate with that labour; but when they have
returned sooner than stipulated, it is open to the owner to make further
profit on them by hiring them out afresh.

This is what is meant by ‘failure’ in the text.

Similarly as regards *time* also, the contract being—‘These oxen may
work for me for a month, and your interest shall be so much,’—if the man
returns the bullocks in a fortnight (the man does not have to pay the
full reward).

In both these cases, the debtor has ‘*entered into the
wheel-ccntract*’—*i.e*., accepted its terms—and in this contract a
special place or time has been stipulated,—if then, on account of
reasons described above, he has not kept up to the stipulated place or
time, and has thus ‘failed’ in regard to them,—‘*he shall not
suffer*’—have to pay—‘*the reward*,’ in the form of the stipulated
interest.—(156)


