+++
title = "157 समुद्रयानकुशला देश-कालार्थदर्शिनः"

+++
The present verso is an answer to the question—“In the case cited above,
is there to be paid no interest at all? Or is it to be 5 *per cent*?”

‘*Sea-voyage*’ has been mentioned only by way of illustration; the sense
is that whatever interest is fixed by traders who know all about journey
by land and water, should be determined as the exact amount to be paid.

‘*Those capable of calculating the profits in connection with a
particular place and time*,’—persons who know what amount of profit is
to be made whore,—and not only those, pilots and others, who are *expert
in sea-voyages*.

Others have explained the foregoing verses in the following manner,
making gratuitous additions to its words:—The last verse (157) is in
answer to the question.—“In a case where the debtor has entered into a
contract on the strength of profits to be made at a particular place or
time,—but on reaching that place, he does not make the profit that he
had expected,—then what amount of interest should he pay?” And the
mention of the term ‘*cakravṛddhi*’ (which, in this interpretation would
not mean ‘wheel-interest,’ but ‘compound interest,’ which the debtor
agrees to pay, on expectation of large profits) would include the
‘privately stipulated’ interest also. In such a case, the king shall
decide as due that amount of interest which may be fixed by those
tradesmen who know each other’s circumstances and the chances of profit
and loss.

‘*As regards the exact amount to be paid*,’ ‘*adhigamam
prati*,’—‘*Prati*’ is a proposition denoting ‘indication,’ and as such
governs the Accusative in ‘*adhigamam*,’ according to Pāṇini 1.4.90.


