+++
title = "159 प्रातिभाव्यं वृथादानम्"

+++
‘*Prātibhāvyam*’ *is that which* *is* *due from the surety*,—*i.e*., the
paying off of the debt due by the party for whom he has stood surety; it
is this that is called ‘*surety-money*.’

What is denied here is the son’s *liability*; and the denial of
liability implies the denial of its being his duty to pay; and in as
much as a man never pays what it is not his duty to pay, the meaning of
the text is that *he should not pay*. The sense of (the root ‘*arh*’ is
to be thus explained in accordance with the sense of the infinitive verb
with which it occurs.

“But how could there be any idea of the son’s liability to pay the
surety-money, etc., when these were not *debts* incurred by his father?”

There is no force in this objection. When a man has undertaken to pay a
certain sum it is as good as a ‘debt,’ since the result is the same. And
when definitely known, it is a ‘debt,’ and as such may he considered as
being due to be paid by the son. That is why this liability has got to
be denied.

‘*Futile gift*’;—Gift promised in joke or under similar circumstances,
made in some such form as ‘I request you to have this man paid such and
such an amount by such and such a banker.’ If a messenger has been sent
with this message, but the payment is not actually made, either on
account of the banker’s absence, or of some other reason,—and the father
dies in the meantime,—the son cannot be made to pay the gift.

Debts incurred in gambling are ‘*gambling debts*’; *i.e*., the amount
that has been actually lost at play, or the money that can he proved to
have been borrowed for the purpose of gambling, shall not he paid. In
the case of a person who abandons his family and relations and lives and
sleeps constantly at gambling dens, and is known to be always
playing,—it can he easily ascertained that his debts are all due to
gambling.

Debts due to drinking are said to be, ‘*due to liquor*’; ‘*liquor*’
standing for all sorts of intoxicating drugs. Hence the present denial
partains to the debts of a man who is an inveterate drunkard.

‘*Balance of fines and duties*’;—if the father has paid a part of the
fine or part of the duty,—but did not pay the entire amounts,—then the
balance cannot be realised from the son. That is, he cannot be made to
pay what the father did not pay.

Another *Smṛti text* lays it down in general terms—‘the son shall not be
made to pay surety-money, trade-duties, debts due to gambling and
drinking, and lines.’ ( *Gautama*, 12.41.)

Thus then, there is an option. If the crime for which the fine had been
inflicted was a serious one, or the property inherited from the father
is a large one, then the *balance* only of the fine, as of the duties,
shall be remitted; but if they have not. been serious, then the whole
shall be remitted.—(159)


