+++
title = "160 दर्शनप्रातिभाव्ये तु"

+++
The ‘*law laid down*’—by me—‘in *the preceding verse*,’—*viz*., ‘the
surety-money due from the father shall not be payable by the
son’—applies only to the case of ‘*surety for appearance*.’

This assertion might give rise to the idea that the son should be made
to pay in the case of ‘surety for guarantee,’—hence the author proceeds
to add—‘In the case of the *death of the surety for payment*,’ the heirs
are made to pay up, and not in the case of any other kind of surety.

“If such is the meaning, then the first half of the verse is
superfluous; for when it is declared that the son is liable only for the
dues by the *Surety for Payment*, it follows that he is not liable for
the dues by any other form of surety. If it be argued that it is for the
purpose of making things clear that the first, half is added,—then the
case of ‘surety for guarantee’ also should have been added, otherwise,
it would be doubtful whether the denial (contained in the preceding
verse), excluded as it would be from the two cases of surety, is a
prohibition or a positive injunction.”

There can be no such doubt; since the matter has been clearly stated in
another Smṛti—‘In a case where the surety for appearance, or the surety
for confidence, has died, the sons should not pay the dues, but they
should pay in the case of the Surety for Payment,’ (Yājñavalkya,
*Vyavahāra*, 54). In the present text also, as the assertion ‘*in the
case of the death of Surety for Payment*, etc.,’ is in the form of a
positive injunction, it cannot become applicable to the case of any
other form of surety. There is nothing wrong however in the implications
of merely re-iterative assertions (as the first half of the verse is)
being extended (to cases other than those directly mentioned). If the
question is raised, as to the purpose for which such re-iteration should
have been made,—our answer is that it is a peculiarity of Manu’s style
of writing.—(160)


