+++
title = "163 मत्तोन्मत्तार्ताध्यधीनैर् बालेन"

+++
The term ‘*vyavahāra*’ is synonymous to ‘*kārya*,’ which stands for all
such transactions as gifts, deposits, sales and so forth, as also the
documents supporting these;—all this is ‘*not valid*’; *i.e*., even
though it has been done, it is as good as undone.

‘*Drunk*’ and ‘*insane*’;—these terms have been already explained
before.

‘*Distressed*,’—suffering the pangs caused by the loss of wealth or
relatives; as also one who apprehends an imminent danger.

‘Drunk’ and the other terms being used in their literal sense, the
situation spoken of here is applicable only so long as the men are
actually under the influence of ‘*drink*’ and other conditions.

What is mentioned here is only by way of illustration; and it stands for
‘any man who is not quite in his senses.’ To this end it has been
declared—‘Business should be done with a man when he is in his senses;
as when he is not under his senses, he is not master of himself, and
this invalidates the transaction.’ A man is said to be ‘not in his
senses’ when his mind is perturbed and he is incapable of understanding
his business. This has been thus described—‘men beset with lust and
anger, or distraction or dangers and vices, as also those under the
influence of love or hatred are said to be ‘*not in their senses*’
(*Nārada*, 1.41). In this text, the first line has to be treated as a
double compound term ‘*kāma*’ to ‘*vyasana*’ for one copulative
compound, and this with the participal adjective ‘*pīḍita*’ forms the
Instrumental Determinative Compound, in accordance with Pāṇini, 2.1.32;
hence the man excluded is one who is actually suffering from the
mentioned distractions. Thus the man who is ‘*beset with lust*’ is
always hankering after the embraces of the woman he loves;—the man who
is preoccupied with gambling or other similar things is said to be
‘beset with distractions.’

Such persons as have been enumerated here,—even though they be real
owners of the property concerned in the transaction,—are not in a
position to grasp the real nature of ‘ownership’ or ‘surety’ or such
other details of a transaction; and as such their action cannot he
regarded as valid. And the reason for this lies in the fact that having
had their minds preoccupied by other things, they cannot clearly grasp
what they are saying, when, on being asked by some one, they may
say—‘give this to such and such a man,’ or that ‘I have promised to be
surety for such an amount, or for such an object,’ and so forth. In fact
they accept anything that the man asks for, being desirous as he is of
getting rid of the man whose presence is an obstacle to what may be
engaging attention at the time—and they say ‘you go, I shall do all that
you say,’ and thus place themselves entirely under the control of
another person. This is what is meant by what has been said above
regarding the man being ‘not master of himself’; and the meaning is that
‘just as the action of the man who is not master of himself is not
valid, so also is the action of one who, though master of himself, is
under the influences mentioned’; and just as the man who is not master
of himself cannot make use of what is his own, so also the man who is
overpowered by lust and other things is unable to understand the details
of the transaction and discriminate between its advantages and
disadvantages; and in this sense he is ‘not master of himself.’

‘*Distressed*’ (in Nārada’s text) has been already explained. Though the
terms *^(‘)abhiyukta*,’ ‘distracted’ and ‘*ārta*’ (distressed) denote
the *qualified person*, yet in the context in which they occur they have
to be taken as standing for the *qualities* of ‘distraction’ and
‘distress’ (these being construed with ‘*pīḍita*,’ ‘*beset with*’
‘*vices*’—arising from lust, anger and other causes, such as hunting and
the like.

Any man who is devoting his entire attention to any matter is said to be
‘beset with distraction or vice’; as also is the person who, though not
actually engaged in any pet vice, is rapt in expounding its virtues.

Or (with a view to retain the literal meaning of the terms ‘*abhiyukta*’
and ‘*ārta*’), the two terms ‘*Kama*’ (‘lust’) and ‘*krodha*’ (‘anger’)
may be taken as standing for the ‘lustful’ and the ‘angry’; and in this
case the participial adjective ‘*pīḍita*,’ ‘beset with,’ would be
compounded with the copulative compound formed of only ‘danger’ and
‘vice’; the other terms of the compound standing by themselves.

‘*Those under the influence of*’—*i.e*., overpowered by—‘*love and
hatred*’;—‘Love’ means *attachment to a person regarded as his own*;
when a man regards another as his own,—even though he be not actually
related to him,—then, whenever he comes to think of him, or whenever
anything good happens to him, he has a feeling of satisfaction; this is
what constitutes ‘love.’ The reverse of this is ‘hatred’; when a man is
regarded as one’s enemy, there is a feeling of satisfaction when
anything wrong happens to him. Such is the nature of ‘love’ and
‘hatred.’

Under everyone of the conditions described, the man’s mind is perturbed,
and unable to be fixed, even for a moment, upon the business in hand.
People under such conditions say pne thing and do another. It is only
when men are in this condition that they are really ‘not in their
senses.’ Otherwise (if the words were taken in their literal sense), in
as much as all men are (more or less) ‘beset with lust, etc., or
‘distressed’ by old age, or some disease of the eyes or of the head,—all
would have to be regarded as ‘not in his senses’; and the ‘wholly
dependent’ Born Slave, the son and the disciple and the wife would not
be so regarded (even though, as ‘not master of themselves,’ these also
have been declared to be persons whose transaction is not valid). Though
literally the *Born Slave* alone is ‘*wholly dependent*,’ yet since this
latter term has been taken to be indicative of ‘those who are not master
of themselves,’ the son, the disciple and the wife all become included
under this same category.

Anything that these persons do, in the shape of making gifts out of
their own property and the like, after having obtained the permission of
their master, is quite valid. Says *Nārada* (1.39.40)—‘The transaction
entered into by a minor, or by one who is not master of himself, is
declared to be as good as undone’; and again,—‘The Disciple is not
master of himself, as it is the teacher in whom the character of the
master rests; wives and sons and all such dependents as the slave and
the like, are also not master of themselves; the master being the
householder himself on whom the property has devolved from bis
ancestors.’ (*Nārada*, 1.33.34.)

“What is said regarding wives not being masters of their property and
husbands alone being the masters, cannot be right; since property being
common to both, how can the husband alone, without the concurrence of
his wife, he entitled to enter into such transactions as gifts, sales
and the like?”

This has been already explained, by the following text of Nārada
(1.26)—‘All that is done by women is invalid, except in times of
distress.’

Further, Nārada (1.42), having mentioned the ‘eldest members of the
family,’ goes on to add that ‘it is only when the transaction of selling
is entered into by him that it is valid’; and what is said here in
regard to ‘selling’ applies to all transactions relating to property in
general. So that, just as in the case of the junior male members of the
family, so in the case of the female members also, ‘dependence’ means
‘absence of control’; and ‘ownership’ would be incompatible with this
‘dependence’; because ‘dependence’ denotes *subjection to the control of
others*, *i.e*., acting up to the wishes of other persons. Thus then, if
the ‘dependent’ person is incapable of making use of any property except
in accordance with the wish of another person, what sort of ‘ownership’
would belong to him or her? It may he argued that ‘ownership’ and
‘dependence’ would be quite compatible, as in the case of the minor,—in
the sense that while he is not fit to enter into any such transactions
as gift, sale or pledge, yet he is at full liberty to spend the property
upon himself; for his own enjoyment he is quite free to make use of it
any way he chooses; while to the other transactions he would be entitled
only after he has reached majority. But even this could not be possible
in the case of women, who are never free from ‘subjection’ or
‘dependence’; as says Manu (5.147).—‘Be she a minor, or a full-grown
woman, or an elderly lady, the woman, by herself, shall not enter into
any transaction; such is the settled law.’ It is for this reason that in
the case of women, ‘ownership’ and ‘subjection’ have been held to be
incompatible.

This ‘subjection’ of women however does not mean that women are not to
make use of their property; all that is meant is that they are not to
make improper use of it, in the shape of indiscriminate gifts or sale.
So that what is meant by saying that ‘women are *dependent* upon others’
is that by themselves they are incapable of judging what would be
beneficial for themselves, or what person deserves a gift of gold or
land, or to whom a daughter should be given in marriage; or from whom a
certain article should be purchased, or to whom something should be sold
and so forth. It is for this reason that at the time that they are
executing a bond or some such deed, it is necessary that they should
obtain the sanction of their husband or some such relative; because if
the business were done by herself alone, it would be open to her to
say—‘I know nothing about this,—I was cheated by you’; if, on the other
hand, the sanction of the husband and the relations has been previously
obtained, what could she say? It is in view of this that it has been
declared—‘Transactions entered into by women also are valid, if they are
sanctioned by the husband, or by the son, in the absence of the husband,
or by the king, in the absence of both husband and son.’

Too much of ‘subjection’ also has been qualified—‘when permitted, she is
fully capable of spending and selling.’ But what is meant by this is
that, she is to be permitted to spend money for the up-bringing of
children and other such matters, but never to alienate the ownership
entirely.

Further, the declaration—‘she shall be confined, or abandoned in
presence of the family’ (Manu, 9.83)—also indicates that there is
‘subjection’ only of *women*, not *of men*; since even in the case of
the outcast, it has been laid down that people should await the
completion of the necessary expiatory rites.

It is in accordance with this view that, even in times of direct
distress, there is to be no selling of *male* slaves.

Thus, so far as ‘subjection’ or ‘dependence’ is concerned, its exact
nature as pertaining to the wife, the son, the disciple and the slave,
is dependent upon the nature of the man’s ownership over each of these.
And as the ownership over the family property rests exclusively in the
master of the house, the wife has no right to perforin even sacrifices
out of that property, except with her husband’s permission.

“We find that there are two declarations—(*a*) ‘on the death of the
husband, the woman continues to live under her sons’; and again (*b*)
‘so long as his parents are alive, the man shall remain subject to them,
even though he may have become old,’—which latter places the son totally
under subjection; so that these two texts are naturally contradictory.”

There is no contradiction: what is said in (*b*) is that ‘the son shall
remain under his mother, *during his minority*’; and the subjection of
the mother to the son \[asserted in (*a*) \] means that he is to guard
his mother’s property against dangers from thieves and others. And what
is meant by the son’s subjection to his father refers to the state in
which the son lives with the father and has not set up a separate
household. When he has set up a separate household and acquired his own
property, then ‘the son shall be treated as a friend, after the age of
sixteen years’; which means that he is entirely master of himself.

The ‘*minor*’ referred to in the text is one who is below sixteen years
of age, and has not entered business.

‘*Senile*’—who has lost his memory and liecome incapable of transacting
business. Though it is possible for such a man to be in his senses at
times, yet his acts cannot be valid, since there can be no certainty
regarding the condition of his mind. When however the old man’s wife is
carefully looking after his affairs, if a certain act has been done with
her sanction, it is to be regarded as valid.

‘*Asambaddhakṛtaḥ*’—‘*effected by one who is unauthorised*.’—If a man
transacts business on behalf of another person, without being authorised
by him,—and he is neither his father nor brother,—it is not open to him
to say—‘this man owes a hundred to Devadatta.’ But when a number of
brothers do business in common, and are equally entitled and capable of
doing it,—if any one of them sells cattle or other property, or pledges
a house or some such property, the transaction is quite valid.

The term ‘*vyavahāra*’ in the present text stands for all kinds of
business, though from the context it would be restricted to
*debt-transactions* only.—(163)


