+++
title = "165 योगाधमनविक्रीतं योगदानप्रतिग्रहम्"

+++
‘*Fraud*’ is *deceit*; when a certain thing has been mortgaged
fraudulently,—*i.e*., when it is found that it has been done in an
improper manner,—then the king shall ‘*nullify it*’. A debtor, on being
pressed by the creditor, may say ‘I have nothing’;—on which the latter
may say, ‘you have a cultivated field, a barren plot, a house, give me
these.’ In view of the possibility of this demand, the debtor mortgages
his property beforehand, to a friend or relative, so that when the
demand is actually made, he says—‘all this is already mortgaged.’ In
this case, even though the mortgage-bond may be there, it is easily
perceived that there is no real mortgagee in the case; for if there were
a real mortgagee, how could it he possible for the property to be still
enjoyed by the alleged mortgager? In such a case, having found the
mortgage to be fraudulent, the king should nullify it and make the
debtor surrender to the creditor all his cultivated field and other
property.

Similarly in a case whore the man has acquired a property in one form,
but transferred it to another in another form,—this also is a
‘fraudulent transaction’; and in this case, when the fraud has been
detected, the debtor should be made to execute another transfer-deed in
the right form.

So also in the case of sales and other transactions. When a person sells
a high-priced article, but does not receive its price from the buyer,
but has declared to him ‘I have sold this, it is yours,’—then after
sometime, it is not open to him to say ‘I have not sold it, it is mine.’
In fact any rescission of sale cannot be permitted after the lapse of
ten days; nor when the sale has been effected by a trustworthy person.
That a certain selling-transaction has been fraudulent is to be
ascertained, when it is found that either on account of some defect in
the article sold, or some other cause, the article sold does not serve
the purposes that it was alleged to be able to servo, or is found
incapable of being treasured as a valuable thing (?).

‘*Fraudulent gift and acceptance*’;—though the act of *giving* involves
that of accepting also, and hence the one would have implied the
other,—neither being possible without the other,—yet the text has
mentioned both, for the purpose of filling up the metre. Or such mention
was necessary, as otherwise, if only one act were mentioned, the
resultant penalty would fall upon the doer of that act only, and not on
that of the other, on the ground of this latter not having been directly
mentioned. Hence, in order to indicate that the penalty should be
inflicted upon the giver and the receiver both, both the acts have had
to be mentioned.

“In that case, on the same grounds, in the case of the acts of
‘*fraudulent mortgage and sale*’ also, the other party to the
transaction,—the doer of the act of buying for instance—should have been
mentioned.”

It is not absolutely necessary to do so; since the requisite information
is supplied by other *Smṛti-texts*; and since all the Smṛti-texts treat
of a common subject, they can always be taken as one conglomerate whole.

*E.g*., when a thing is owned by two persons, if one of them, after
having made a compact with the *receiver*, makes the other partner make
the gift to him,—this is a ease of ‘*fraudulent gift and acceptance*.’
The compound ‘*dānapratigraham*’ is treated as singular, because
‘*dāna*’ and ‘*pratigraha*’ together form a copulative compound.

‘*All wherein he detects fraud*.’—‘*Fraud*’ means *deceit*. Even apart
from the acts that have been specified, there are various kinds of
fraudulent transactions. For instance, on being pressed by his creditor,
a debtor approaches a wealthy person with the appeal—‘until yon agree to
stand surety for me, I shall not leave you’;—whereupon the wealthy man
makes a secret compact with the creditor—‘accept mo as the man’s surety,
and during all this time I shall go on tormenting him, he has done me
much wrong, I am standing surety for him only for the purpose of
tormenting him, and I shall not be liable to pay anything on his
account’;—thereupon the creditor says openly to the debtor,—‘If you
cannot produce a man who will stand surety for you, nor do you propose
to liquidate the debt by manual labour or such other means, then your
property must be forfeited’;—being thus pressed he approaches the
aforesaid wealthy person, who however says—‘I have never before had any
business-transaction with him’; but he later on says again, ‘all right,
I shall be your surety’; and the debtor also, in view of the trouble in
store for him, accepts it.

What is said here should be taken as applying to all such transactions
as relate to trades and crafts and so forth It is only by way of
illustration that the acts of ‘gift, mortgage, and sale’ have been
specially mentioned. The meaning thus is that whatever transaction the
king finds out to be fraudulent, ‘*he* *shall nullify*’; even though it
has been effected, he shall declare it to be *not-affected*, cancelled,
shall not regard it as valid,—and he shall also punish both parties to
the transaction.—(165)


