+++
title = "166 ग्रहीता यदि"

+++
It has been declared that the debt is to be repaid by the man by whom it
was contracted, and in his absence by his son or grandson, and in the
absence of those hitter, by any one who inherits his property; and from
this it would seem that no one else was liable in any circumstances. It
is in view of this that the author adds the present verse.

If the man who contracted the debt is ‘*lost*’—*i.e*., dead or gone
abroad, ‘*and the* *expenditure was incurred by the family*,’—then that
debt ‘*is to be paid by bis relatives*’; *i.e*., by his brother or
nephew or uncle, *etc*.,—‘*even though these may have been
separated*’—*i.e*., had divided their property;—‘*svataḥ*,’ *i.e., out
of their own property*.

The debt that has been contracted by one among several brothers 1ms to
be repaid out of the common household, specially if there has been no
division among them. To this end we have the declaration -¹ The debt
that has been contracted by an unseparated uncle or brother, or by the
mother, for the sake of the family, all this is to be paid out of the
common property, so that from among the undivided members of a family,
if any one has contracted a debt for the sake of the family, it should
be paid by all other members,—brother, uncle, nephew or cousin; but not
so, if the debt contracted was not for the use of the family.’ The term
‘unseparated’ implies that debt for the use of the whole family is
generally contracted only by such persons; for people who have become
separated are never found to be contracting debts for the maintenance of
families other than their own.

‘*Even though these may hare been separated*’;—the term ‘even’ implies
that it has to be paid of course by those who are *not separated*. If it
so happens that from among separated brothers, one goes abroad, without
making any provision for his family, and another, being of a magnanimous
temperament, takes upon himself the burden of maintaining his family
during his absence—then the absentee should, on his return, repay any
debts that his separated brother or uncle may have contracted on behalf
of his family.—(166)


