+++
title = "169 त्रयः परार्थे"

+++
It is only on being requested by another person that the witness, the
surety and the Judge should either appear as a witness, stand surety or
investigate case’s,—and not forcibly (thrusting themselves); hence if
these persons should volunteer to do it, their action has no validity.

Or, the meaning may he that ‘these persons undergo suffering for doing
the work of other persons,—and they have not. the slightest selfish
motive,—hence they should not ho forced to do the work.’

The *Brāhmaṇa* and the rest, on the other hand, ‘*prosper*,’ being
approached by others, lienee, the Brāhmaṇa also should not he forced,
against his will, to accept a gift.

Or, the meaning may be that—‘the prosperity of the Brāhmaṇa is for the
good of others,’—his action therefore is always for the sake of others,
and not for his own,—hence in his case gifts and acceptances should not
he rescinded.’ There is a popular saying to the effect that ‘a gift by
force is condemned,’ but this does not mean that one should not make a
person make gifts to others; the ‘force’ in this case (which is
condemned) is ‘importunate begging.’

Similarly the ‘*affluent*,’ the rich man who makes a living by
money-lending, should not be forced by such expostulations as—‘why does
this man advance money on interest to other persons and not to me?’

Or, the meaning may be that ‘no loan shall he forced upon an unwilling
spendthrift;—as it is only when money is lent at the request of the
other party that the money-lender prospers, and not when he forces the
loan upon him, since such forcing is forbidden by law.’

Similarly, ‘*the merchant*,’ like the money-lender, carries on his
business only with a view to add to his wealth. The ‘merchant’ is one
who lives by buying and selling.

‘*King*’—prospers only when receiving lines imposed upon persons charged
before him,—and not by forcing or encouraging such suits and charges. To
this end there is the declaration that ‘the king shall not encourage
law-suits.’

The case of the ‘Brāhmaṇa’ and the rest has been cited only for the
purpose of illustrating what is enjoined regarding the duty of the
*king*.

Or, the whole of the present verse, as also the next, is meant to be
illustrative of the entire section.—(169)


