+++
title = "179 कुलजे वृत्तसम्पन्ने"

+++
He whose birth and family are well known,—whose forefathers are known to
have been learned, righteous and rich,—who never have recourse to
improper acts, being mindful of the reputation of their family. In fact
such a person is incapable of hearing the slightest blame; and yet it is
such people! that are subject to severest criticism at the hands of the
people.

‘*Vṛtta*’ is *character, conduct*; i.e., being naturally mindful of
public opinion.

‘*Cognisant of the law*’;—who has become acquainted with the true
meaning of Smṛtis, Purāṇas and *Itihāsas* by repeatedly studying them.

‘*Truthful*’—who has found, in all business-relations, to speak in
strict accordance with real facts.

‘*Has a large following*,’—he who is held in high esteem by his friends
and relations, as also by the officers of the king,—and is, as such, not
amenable to be approached by dishonest state-officials.

The ‘*wealthy*’ man avoids the misappropriation of other people’s
property, with a view to safeguard his own possessions, and also through
fear of transcendental results; the idea in his mind being—‘I have
enough wealth of my own, why should I think of the property of others?
If I were detected, I would be punished.’

‘*Honourable*,’ who always acts righteously, or who is of a
straightforward nature.

The nominal affix ‘*ghañ*’ (in the noun ‘*nikṣepa*,’ ‘*deposit*’) has
the force of the passive, and makes the word stand for the gold and
other property that are kept as *deposits*.

‘*Shall entrust*’—Place.

‘*The wise man*’;—the man who entrusts deposits in the said manner is
‘*wise*’; otherwise he becomes a *fool*.

The Author here is ottering an advice in the manner of a friend; and the
advice has no spiritual purpose behind it, as there is in the case of
such acts as the *Aṣṭakā* and the like.

When a ‘deposit’ is placed with such a person, it is never lost; nor is
there any doubt as to who has placed it and with whom. On the other
hand, if a person is a pauper, a notorious cheat or drunkard,—even if he
he dragged up, no one would even believe that a deposit had been placed
with him; when the man is not possessed of a single farthing, how could
it he believed that he would have been entrusted with gold or such large
properties?—(179)


