+++
title = "180 यो यथा"

+++
‘*Yathā*,’—*in the form*; *i.e*., sealed or unsealed, with witnesses or
without witnesses and so forth.

‘*In that same form*’ should the thing be received back; the thing
should be *recovered* in the same form in which it had been *delivered*.

In a case where it is generally known that the party concerned always
keeps deposits properly sealed,—if a dispute arises, and the deposit is
found to be unsealed, if the trustee were to say ‘this man never seals
his deposits, he forces them upon me and goes off,’ he would be
suspected of dishonesty and would lose his case; there being no room for
any other evidence so far;—but when, on the seal being found broken, the
question arises as to what part of the property has been extracted, the
king should call other kinds of evidence; the guilty man however is to
be punished in the first place, with the penalty prescribed for
dishonest dealing in general;—and secondly, another penalty in
connection with the ‘deposit’ has to be imposed after the exact amount
extracted has been determined.

“in the case of a dishonest dealing, the man deserves to be mulcted of
the entire amount involved.”

True; but this is so only in cases where the entire guilt is clearly
indicated by proofs. For instance, a certain village has been robbed,
Devadatta is accused of having colluded with other thieves and robbed
the village on that day,—thereupon he pleads—‘on that day I did not go
to that village,’—witnesses declare that he had been seen in the village
on that day, but it had not been seen that he had actually committed the
robbery,—from this the deduction is that the man having denied the
robbery as well as his presence in the village, since his presence had
been proved, the denial of the robbery also was not true; so that when
there was other evidence clearly proving the man’s presence in the
village, it was safe to infer that he had committed the robbery also.

In the present case however, it may he that the seal was broken through
carelessness (and not necessarily intentionally), (so that the penalty
need not always be severe).

‘*As the delivery so the recovery*,’—*i.e*., what was delivered ‘sealed’
should be received back also ‘sealed.’

Fraudulent denial may be made by a man who might think that there would
be no occasion for his being hauled up. The presence of such fraudulent
intention may be inferred; but the exact amount involved cannot be
determined entirely on the assertion of the depositor, except through
other kinds of evidence. So in such cases the right course would be to
arrive at a decision with the help of ordeals. And (as for the actual
award), it is only where no certainty is possible in regard to the
entire claim that a partial decree is awarded.—(180)


