+++
title = "182 साक्ष्य्-अभावे प्रणिधिभिर्"

+++
**(verses 8.181-182)  
**

From what has gone before people might be led to think that in a case
where there are no witnesses, recourse should at once be had to
*ordeals*;—and it is to guard against this that the author adds these
texts.

The meaning is that in the case of non-payment of debt and other
disputes, the judge has recourse to ordeals as soon as it is found that
no witnesses are available;—but this is not what should be done in the
case in question; in such cases the character of the man is tested
through spies. If, on being so tested, it is found that the man does not
trip in his dealings, then he shall not be disgraced With having to
undergo an ordeal. If, on the other hand, he does trip, then it is only
right that he should be suspected of having misappropriated the deposit;
and in this case he should be made to undergo ordeals; because the mere
fact of his having misappropriated one deposit does not necessarily
prove that he had misappropriated another deposit also; for it is just
possible

that on account of some urgent need he might have been led to commit
misappropriation in one case, while in another ease, either by reason of
his needs having been supplied or on account of repentance, he might
have restored it honestly.

The present verses are to be taken as forbidding the course of hurriedly
making the trustee undergo ordeals; and they are meant to point out a
new line of evidence. Then again even though in the case of the man
misappropriating the judge’s deposit, there is immediate punishment, yet
it does not follow that the same punishment shall be inflicted upon him
in connection with the alleged, but uncertain, misappropriation of that
belonging to the plaintiff. For if such penalty were to be inflicted
even in cases of uncertainty, there would be no laws laying down the
means of arriving at *certain* conclusions. Hence it has been considered
necessary that decisions should be arrived at by means of reasonings.

For these reasons verse 181 should not be taken in its literal sense
(that the man *shall be made to pay* ‘*yācyaḥ*’); but it should be
interpreted in a different manner, being construed along with verse 182.

The verbal construction of the verse we explain now as follows:—‘*on the
departure of that depositor*’—by whom the deposit had been placed,—‘he
shall *be asked by the judge to restore it*.’

There being no witnesses,—when the depositor asks for the restoration of
his deposit and the trustee denies the deposit, saying ‘you never
deposited anything with me’—and being appealed to by the depositor, the
king shall not at once put the trustee to the ordeal;—what then shall he
do?—The judge shall deposit his own or some one else’s gold or silver
with the man, through spies, and then ask for its restoration.

The term ‘*judge*,’ here stands for any person who has been deputed by
the king to investigate the ease.

“Is he to be asked directly by the Judge himself?”

No; it should be done through spies,—those same through whom the deposit
has been placed.

‘*Of propet age and appearance*’;—they should he of ‘proper age,’ so
that they may not be minors; for if such minors were to go to transact
business, the man would suspect that they had been put up by others to
cheat him; whereas if they were full-grown people, no such suspicion
would arise.

Similarly they should be of ‘*proper appearance*’;—in the case of some
people their very appearance is indicative of their fickle nature; that
appearance is to be regarded as ‘proper’ which indicates freedom from
love or hatred.

Thus the meaning comes to be that the spies chosen should be such that
the trustee may not suspect that the whole business was a trick to
entrap him.

‘*Under some pretexts*.’—That is, they may say, for instance,—‘The man
who is depositing this good is leaving the city from fear of harrassment
by the king, that is why I am placing this deposit with you.’ This
untrue representation is what is called ‘*pretext*’ here.

All this is to be done, when the original depositor (the original
plaintiff) is not present.—(182)


