+++
title = "185 निक्षेपोपनिधी नित्यम्"

+++
‘*Next-of-kin*,’—of the depositor; *i.e*., his son, or brother, or wife.
If the depositor has the right of ownership, so has his wife also; the
son also has a right over the property of his grandfather; and the
brother also, who is still united in property, has a right over it.
Hence, if the depositor happens to be sent, any one of these relatives
may tell the depository—‘give the deposit to me, it belongs to me’;—on
this the depository may hand it over to him thinking—‘this is their
joint property, one has deposited it and another is taking it away, what
harm is there in this?’—and it is with a view to guard against this that
the text says—‘*Deposits, open or sealed, shall not be handed over to
the next-of-kin*.’

A hortatory argument is added—‘*In the event of a mishap occurring, they
become los* t,’—‘*mishap*’ in the form of the kinsman going out of the
country and so forth,—if any such happens ‘*they become lost*.’ If the
kinsman, having received the deposit, did not make it over to the person
who had deposited it, then, on being charged by the latter, what answer
could the depositary give? It would be no answer to say—‘it was taken
away by your brother, who was the joint owner of it’; because it has
been declared—‘as the delivery so the recovery’ (180); so that the
deposit should be restored to the person who actually deposited it, be
he the rightful owner or not. This is the simple fact that is set forth
in this detail.

If however nothing happens to the ‘next-of-kin’ then there would be no
harm in restoring the deposit to him; this is what is meant by the
assertion.—‘*They do not become lost, if no mishap occurs*.’ Because in
this case the answer of the depositary would be—‘I restored it to him as
otherwise it might become lost with me.’

What the text means is that—‘if the deposit has been taken away by the
depositor’s kinsman, then, on being asked by the depositor to restore
it, the depositary shall make it good out of his own property.’—(185)


