+++
title = "193 उपधाभिश् च"

+++
‘*Fraudulent means*,’ ‘deceit,’ and ‘pretence’ are synonymous terms: and
this ‘fraud’ is of several forms:—(1) ‘altering the thing’: having shown
saffron, the man substitutes the *kusumbha* flower for it,—(2) ‘using
short weights and measures,’ and so forth. The rule regarding these
forms of ‘fraud’ is going to be laid down later on, under 203 *et seq*.
The forms of ‘fraudulent moans’ meant here are—(a) ‘threatening,’ (b)
promising rewards from the king, (e) promising to secure the love of a
maiden, and so forth.

The man makes such false assertions to the other person as—(a) ‘robbers
shall rob you, if I do not protect you,’ or (b) ‘the king was very angry
with you, and I have tried much to appease him,’ or (c) ‘I shall obtain
for you from the king the post of the city-officer,’ or (d) ‘I shall
secure for you some other great benefit,’ or (e) ‘my daughter is very
much in love with you and has sent you this present’;—under these
pretexts he brings to the man some presents and takes away from him much
more valuable things in return;—and in the presence of this other party
he whispers something to the king, or to some other high official, and
says to the man—‘I have been talking regarding your business.’

The man who, by such fraudulent means, enjoys the property of others,
for him the punishment is that he shall be punished ‘*publicly*’—on the
public road—with such ‘*modes of death*,’ as ‘decapitation with the
axe,’ ‘impalement,’ ‘tramling (trambling?) by elephants’ and so forth.

Others have held, on the strength of the ‘context,’ that what is said
here pertains to the case of ‘Deposits’; in this sense the ‘fraudulent
means’ would consist in putting off the restoration by such pretexts
as—‘I do not remember where I kept the thing,’ ‘the article was kept by
another person, who is not here now, he shall come to-morow’ and so
forth; and the man who thus puts it off is said to ‘appropriate’
it.—(193)


