+++
title = "198 अवहार्यो भवेच्"

+++
The preceding verse has declared that the man who sells the property of
another person is not fit to be admitted to any transaction done by
gentlemen, such as the giving of evidence and so forth; and the present
verse prescribes for him the penalty of the fine of six hundred. He
shall be made to pay—fined—six hundred coins.

‘*If a relative*,’ ‘*sānvaya*’;—‘*anvaya*’ means *relation*; he who has
some *relationship* is a ‘*relative*,’—such as the son, the wife, the
brother and so forth. If such a relative, even though not actually
permitted to sell, sells a property, he is not quite a thief; for he is
likely to have the idea ‘if it belongs to my father, it is mine’; and in
his case it is likely that he will hand over the sale-proceeds to the
rightful owner.

The man who has absolutely no relationship with the owner is said to be
‘*not a relative*,’ ‘*niranvayaḥ*’; and such a person ‘*incurs the
guilt* *of* *a thief*’—*i.e*., deserves to be punished as such,
undoubtedly. Specially so if he is ‘*not one having access*’; *i.e*., if
he has no free access to the household of the owner, he should certainly
be punished as a thief. If, on the other hand, the property sold by him
has been obtained from the household itself,—having been given or sold
by some one in the house,—and he has received it through ignorance or
folly,—or if he has bought it in an open sale,—then he shall not be
punished as a thief; he shall only be fined six hundred.

Or the term ‘*apasara*,’ ‘*access*,’ may be taken as standing for modes
of acquisition other than *purchase*,—snoh as gift and the like. The
meaning thus is—‘He is to be regarded as a thief, if he has not
purchased it from anyone, nor acquired it through gift or other modes of
acquisition.’—(198)


