+++
title = "208 यस्मिन् कर्मणि"

+++
This verse adds something more in connection with Vedic rites, which is
relevant to the present context.

In connection with rites, fees are as a rule proscribed for them as a
whole, and not with reference to each priest,—the injunction being in
the form ‘the fee for it shall he twelve hundred’; this same injunction
becomes applicable by ‘transference’ also to such sacrifices as grow out
of, and are analogous to, that in connection with which the fee has been
prescribed;—such sacrifices, for instance, as the *llājasūya* and the
rest;—now in connection with these latter, it is found that with
reference to certain parts of the rite, distinct speciñc fees have been
prescribed as to be paid to a particular priest specifically,—*e.g*.,
‘the bright gold shall be given *to the Adhvaryu*’;—these are what are
called (in the text) ‘*specific fees for its several parts*.’

Now the question arises—Is the gift, like the other sacrificial fees,
connected with the *Adhvaryu*, only in the sense that he is one among
four partners, and it belongs to all the priests, the *Adhraryu* being
only the channel? or that it belongs to the *Adhvaryu* alone, the others
receiving a share only out of the main fee?

This is the question propounded by the verse.

The term ‘*pratyaṅgadakṣiṇā*’ means *the fees directly prescribed in so
many words in connection with special rites as to be given to particular
persons*. Or the term ‘*pratyaṅga*’ may mean *for* *each several part*.

‘*Will one man take all these*,’—the gift being connected with the chief
priest only,—or shall others all ‘*share them*,’—those, equally with the
chief priest, having officiated at the performance;—just as they do in
the case of the main sacrificial fee?—Such is the sense of the question.

The answer to this is that when a certain fee has been prescribed for a
particular person, it is to be taken by him alone: as it is only thus
that the prescribed act of ‘giving’ could he regarded as fulfilled. The
mention of the particular recipient in the rule could not be intended to
serve any transcendental purpose (and no other purpose could it serve,
if the fee were not actually meant to be received by that person
alone).—(208)


