+++
title = "210 सर्वेषाम् अर्धिनो"

+++
From among the priests, ‘*the chief ones receive half*’; *i.e*., they
receive half of the fee that is prescribed for the rite as a whole.

At the *Soma-sacrifice* there are sixteen priests; of these the chief
ones are four: the *Hotṛ*, the *Adhvaryu*, the *Brahman* and the
*Udgātṛ*, and these receive one half of the total fee;—the total fee
being *one hundred and twelve*, fifty-six go to these four men.

Half of this, that is *twenty-eight*, go to the ‘*next*’; *i.e*., those
four whose appointment comes after that of the four mentioned above;
*i.e*., the *Maitrāvaruṇa*, the *Pratiprasthātṛ*, the *Brāhmaṇācchaṃsin*
and the *Prastotṛ*.

The ‘*thirders*’ receive the ‘*third part*.’—The term ‘part’ here is
synonymous with ‘half’; the term ‘half’ does not always stand for two
equal divisions; it is used also in reference to what is very near such
equal divisions; hence the ‘*third part*’ of ‘*fifty-six*’ is understood
to be *sixteen*; so that each of these four *gets four*.

Some people take the ‘third part’ as such that of the total fee; when
others take it as that of *fifty-six*.

The four ‘thirders’ are—the *Acchāvāka*, associated with the *Hotṛ*, the
*Neṣṭṛ* connected with the *Adhvaryu*, the *Agnīd* with the *Brahman*,
and the *Pratihartṛ* with the *Udgātṛ*.

The ‘*Fourthers*’—*i.e*., so called because they perform the *fourth*
part of the rite, and also because they occupy the fourth place from the
*Maitrāvaruṇa*— receive ‘*the fourth part*’—*i.e*., *twelve*—of the
whole; this number being got at in the same manner as before.

This same method of distribution is to be employed also in the case of
the rite of Initiation, where the fee is laid down as ‘a hundred’; where
also the ‘halfers’ and ‘fourthers’ help in the performance.

The practice, that, we have found prescribed elsewhere we have described
in connection with the present text also.—(210)


