+++
title = "212 धर्मार्थं येन"

+++
A man comes to the rich man praying—‘I am desirous of marrying for the
sake of issue,’ or ‘I wish to perform such and such a sacrifice,’ ‘give,
me some money’;—and the money is given to him;—but the man does not
marry, and spends the money either in gambling or over prostitutes, or
for something else, laying it out on interest or agriculture,—then ‘*it
shall not be given to him*.’

When the money has been given already, there can be no sense in
forbidding the gift; (A) hence the sentence should be taken to mean that
‘it shall be taken back from him.’ (B) Or the former clause itself may
be taken in a figurative sentence,—the word ‘*gives*’ being taken in the
sense of ‘promises’; the meaning in this case would be that ‘the
promised money shall not be given.’ In this sense we have the assertion
of Gautama (5.23)—‘Even after promising, no money shall be given to one
who is found to be unrighteous.’

“Of these two explanations (A & B), which is the more reasonable?”

Both are reasonable: the taking back of what has been given, and also
not giving what has been promised. In another *Smṛti* -text we find both
these courses laid down:—Beginning with the words—‘I am going to perform
such and such an act,’ the text goes on to say—‘what is given in
ignorance is as good as not given’ *Nārada*, 4.10-11). This means that
when money has been given for a certain act, if that act is not done,
the money, even though paid, shall ho brought back from the receiver’s
house; and the opinion of Nārada is that in this case there was only a
*promise* of the gift, and its fulfilment would be dependent upon the
actual fulfilment of the purpose for which it had been asked for.—(212)


