+++
title = "215 भृतो नार्तो"

+++
The man who does a stipulated work for a stipulated amount of wages is
what is meant by the term ‘*hireling*’ here; *i.e*., the man who has
been engaged to do a certain service, and who has agreed to do it within
a definite time, if he is paid ‘five rupees’ (for instance), if such a
person does not finish the work, he should be fined eight ‘*kṛṣṇala*’—of
gold, or of silver, or of copper, in accordance with the nature of the
work and other circumstances; and he should not receive the said
*rupees*, which had been fixed as his wages.

But this applies to a case where the man is not ill, and omits to do the
stipulated work, ‘*through arrogance*.’ That is, the fine and the loss
of wages are to be inflicted only upon the man who is not suffering from
any illness, and who omits to do the work through sheer arrogance; so
that it is not open to the man to retort—‘Pay me an amount commensurate
with the labour already incurred by me.’

Some people hold that this same penalty is to be inflicted upon priests
who leave off their work at their own will.

But this is not right; in the case of a sacrificial performance, the
loss to the sacr ifi cer, caused by the rites being only half-done, is
very great, so that the penalty in this ease should also be heavy; all
that the sacrificer has lost should he made good, and the man should
also compensate for the physical suffering involved in the saerificer
having to repeat, the preliminary rites of the ‘*Dīkṣā*,’ the ‘*Upasad*’
and the ‘*Devavrata*.’

In a case where a mechanic approaches the rich man and urges him to
undertake the digging of a tank, or the building of a temple, with the
promise that he would supervise the work and see that it is completed,
but subsequently slips off, then he should” make good all the loss of
money and energy that his employer may have suffered; and thus according
to the law of the ‘trader and the carrier,’ this law has been propounded
by Kātyāyana as being applicable to all cases: in his *Sutra*, be
says—‘If, through the fault of the carrier, the trader suiters some
loss, it shall be borne by the carrier,—and so also the man who, having
urged a man to invest his money on some undertaking, slinks off, after
the work has been only half-done.’ Here ‘*investing*’ means *applying t*
*he* *money to* *the* *work*; and one who makes the man do this, should
make good the loss; such is the sense of the passage.

The law laid down in the verse applies to the person who is engaged on
fooding only, for six months, or one year, to do a specified work. Says
Nārada—‘If a man does not do the stipulated work, he should be forced to
receive his wages and do it; if he receives the wages, but does not do
the work, he should suffer double the amount received in wages; if he
abandons the work before the end of the stipulated time, he deserves to
lose his wages.’—(215)


