+++
title = "219 यो ग्राम-देश-सङ्घानाम्"

+++
‘*Village*’—is a group of households; and the term here stands for the
*inhabitants* of the village; as it is only among *men* that there can
he a compact. Similarly ‘*country*’ is a group of villages.

‘*Confederation*’—a combination formed by persons professing the same
faith or path, even though inhabiting different countries and belonging
to different castes. For instance, there is the ‘confederation of
mendicants,’ the ‘confederation of traders,’ the ‘confederation of
persons learned in the Vedas,’ and so forth.

There are several kinds of business is which inhabitants of villages,
etc., make a combination among themselves. For instance—‘our village is
being encroached upon by the inhabitants of another village,—very
frequently they graze their cattle on our pasture-lands,—they cut our
embankments and carry away water,—if you be all agreed, then we shall
prevent their doing all this,—and when we prevent them, it is possible
that we may come to blows, or may have to appear before the ‘court;—if
we remain combined in all this, then we shall go forward to prevent the
encroachment; otherwise we shall let it be.’ On this compact being
proposed, men may agree to it, saying—‘yes; why should the ancient
privileges of our village be trespassed by them?’ Now, after having thus
entered the compact and encouraged it, if some one were to shirk away
and make common cause with the other party, and become lukewarm towards
his own neighbours,—such a person should be banished by the king from
his kingdom; *i.e*., he should not be allowed to live there any longer.

Similarly, in regard to the business of tradespeople or Brāhmaṇas and
others, when once a man has entered into a compact, he should not break
it.

The penalty here laid down pertains to the breach of compacts relating
to such work as is of public utility, in due accordance with law and
custom, and not detrimental to the interests of the city and kingdom at
large.

‘*Through* *greed*—‘*greed*’ here stands for succumbing to one’s own
selfish interests as served by the inhabitants of the rival village.

For cases of such breach, *through ignorance*, there is another
remedy.—(219)


