+++
title = "222 क्रीत्वा विक्रीय"

+++
In the case of goods whereof buying and soiling are constantly going on,
which do not deteriorate, either in quantity or in quality or in
price—such, for instance, as vessels of copper, tin and other
metals,—whose value remains constant,—if it has not been brought into
use, it can be returned or taken hack within ten days.

When such things as fruits and flowers, which cannot last long, have
been bought at fairs and such gatherings, the ‘repentance’ should be at
the same moment, or on the same day, or the next.

After that, if the purchaser repents—‘this thing I have bought is of no
use to me,’—then he should return it within ten days. Similarly, if the
repentance is on the part of the seller—‘I have not done well in selling
the thing,’—then the buyer should be made to return it to him.

The period here allowed is for the case of persons inhabiting the same
place. In the case of parties belonging to different places, the
returning must be done at the very time of the purchase.

Some people hold that the rule here laid down pertains to such goods as
cattle, land and the like, and not to clothes and such articles.

In another *Smṛti*, a different rule has been laid down in regard to the
buying and selling. Xārada says as follows:—‘Having bought a merchandise
for a certain price, if one thinks that he has not done well in buying
it, he should return it, unharmed, to the seller, on the same day; if he
return it on the second day, the buyer should suffer the third part of
the price paid; on the third day, he loses the double of the third part,
and on the fourth day the thing must remain with the buyer’—(*Nārada* 9.
2-3).

Anything that is laid out for sale is called ‘merchandise,’ by selling
which the seller gets a price, with which he buys something else, and
thus makes a living for himself. Such an article is spread out in the
market by the trader. Now from the use of this particular term in the
text of Nārada, it is clear that something very special is meant; for,
otherwise, the text quoted would mean the same thing as the foregoing
text—‘Having bought a thing at a certain price, etc.’ (*Nārada* 9.1).

Now the question arises—What is this something special that is meant?

Our answer is as follows:—The rule laid down by Nārada is meant to be
applicable to the case where the article, even after being *bought*,
still continues to remain ‘merchandise,’ in the sense that it is laid
out for sale by the tradesman who bought it from a fellow-trader only
for selling it on his own account—*i.e*., in cases of mutual
transactions among tradesmen themselves; while the rule propounded by
Manu is meant to apply to all other cases. Such is the explanation given
by some people.

Now, what is the right view on this point?

In each individual case, one should act according to the nature of the
article concerned, or according to local usage. Thus it is that we And
such practices as the trying of the pace of a horse, the applying of the
goad to the elephant, the discussion of the nature of sales effected and
so on.

In the text of Nārada quoted above, the term ‘*unharmed*’ means *not
spoilt or destroyed*. In the case of ‘deposits’ in the shape of cloths
and such things, the depositor receives the value of only that part of
it which has been spoilt, and the remnant he takes back all right. While
in the case of ‘*sales*’ even the slightest harm makes the buyer liable
to pay the whole price.—(222)


