+++
title = "225 अकन्येति तु"

+++
‘*Not a virgin*’ —*i.e*., one who has already had sexual intercourse. If
a man speaks of a maiden as such, but is unable to prove her guilt, he
should he fined one hundred coins.

Others have held the view that, in view of the fact that the penalty
prescribed is too small in comparison with the serious nature of the
defamation, the text should he taken as referring to the actual
utterance of the exact words ‘not a virgin;’ specially as we cannot get
over the significance of the particle ‘*iti*,’ (‘*as*’);—the sense thus
being that the man is to be fined one hundred, only when ho actually
defames the maiden as a ‘non-maiden.’

“What difference does this make?”

The explanation is as follows:—When the man defames the maiden as a
‘non-virgin,’ if he is asked—‘How is she a non-virgin?’—and he
replies—‘she is immodest, cruel, and prone to using obscene
language,—all which is not proper for virgins,’—hut cannot prove it,
then it is that he is to be fined only one hundred,—*i.e*., when all
that he alleges is the absence in the girl of such qualities as should
he present in all maidens (and does not accuse her of having actually
lost her virginity).

Or, the term ‘virgin’ may he taken as denoting *juniority of age*; and
the meaning of the text explained as follows:—When a man is seeking a
certain girl in marriage, if some one should come and tell him behind
the back of the girl’s relations—‘that girl is not a maiden, she is too
young—or too old,’—then the guardian of the girl complains to the
king—‘my girl is extremely handsome and this man is maligning her to the
prospective bridegroom, because he is himself desirous of having her’;
thereupon if the defamer is proved guilty,—as he is, when he is found to
have made the allegations when the girl was actually of the right
age,—then he is fined ‘one hundred.’—(225)


