+++
title = "227 पाणिग्रहणिका मन्त्रा"

+++
‘*Wife*’ is *consort*; and ‘wife-hood’ is brought about by the
*mantras*,— which are thus ‘*conducive to*’ it. That is, the sacramental
rite called ‘marriage’ is accomplished by the use of these *mantras*, in
the case of the twice-born castes; it is not so in the case of the
*śūdra*, in whose case no *mantras* are used; though, barring the
*mantras*, all the rest of the procedure is the same. It is in this
sense that the *mantras* are indicative of the sacramental rite of
‘marriage.’

Of these ‘*mantras*,’ the completion, end, is to be ‘*recognised*,’—‘*at
the seventh-step*.’ After the ‘offering of fried grains,’ the bride is
made to go round the fire thrice and then move forward seven steps, the
words addressed to her beginning with the words ‘*ekapadī bhava*’ and
ending with ‘*saptapadī bhava*,’ and when the ‘*seventh step*’ has been
thus taken by the bride, there can be no revoking, either on the part of
the bride’s father or on that of the bridegroom. So that even though she
be insane, she has to betaken as ‘wife,’ and cannot be abandoned.

There can be no such ‘marriage’ of a girl, who has already had sexual
intercourse; and in her case even though the entire procedure, up to the
‘offering of fried grains’ may have been gone through, she does not
become a ‘wife.’ So that in this case, a revoking of the bargain is
possible, just as in the case of any other commodity. Just as the
performance of the rites of ‘fire-laying,’ if done by a Śūdra, cannot
make the fire ‘*āhavanīya*’ (sacrificial),—or as the performance of the
fire-offerings and other details of the marriage-rite does not make it a
regular ‘marriage,’ if the bride happens to bn within
‘*sapiṇḍa-relationship*’ to the bride-groom. In fact these cases are
regarded as transgressions, as is clearly indicated by the following
declaration of Vaśiṣṭha:—‘By reason of having gone through the rites the
man becomes liable to expiation and the bride becomes unfit for being
married to any one else.’

“If a man, after having married a girl suffering from a disease
conducive to sterility, does not abandon her, what would be the remedy?”

If he has the wish and the capacity, he shall marry another girl; just
as in the case of one who has a sharp-tongued wife and whom ‘he shall
give up at once’ (Manu, 9.81).

In a case where, after she has given birth to a son and the man has set
up the lire, the wife happens to be attacked by some wasting
disease,—the husband shall not have her superseded; specially as the
circumstances under which supersession is permissible have been strictly
enumerated (9.77-85). Even then, if some one were to take to another
wife, by reason of the unchaste character of his former wife, we could
not prevent him.

In brief then, the rule relating to girls is that,—even though in the
case of ether commodities, there is rescission, by mutual understanding,
even after ten days,—there can be no such revoking in the case of girls
who have been married. Even in cases where girls are given in return for
prices paid, they are to be treated as other commodity only until
marriage has been performed. While in the case of one who is given away
in a purely religious spirit, there can be no revoking at all; so say
the texts. Though in such cases also, there is revocation,—as declared
by Yājñavalkya (I.65) ‘Even though she has been betrothed, the girl may
be taken back if a better bridegroom present himself,’—but only till the
‘seventh step’ has been taken. Once the ‘seventh step’ has been taken,
the gift cannot be rescinded; and hence there is no revoking in this
case; just as there is none in the case of such gifts as the cow and the
like. When once a cow has been given to a person, the gift cannot he
returned and taken back, oven by mutual understanding; because the act
of *giving* has been already accomplished at the time that the gift was
made. So that when once the gift has been accepted, if it were given
again to the original giver,—then this would only he an entirely
different act of gift, and not the revoking of the former gift.
Similarly in the case where both the bride and the bridegroom are
possessed of the requisite qualifications, there can be no rescission
(of the betrothal), even before the marriage has been performed. While
after the marriage has been performed, there can be no abandonment of
even a defective bride. Though if she happens to be one who has already
had intercourse, and is therefore not a ‘maiden’ at all,—she may be
abandoned; since marriage is enjoined as to be done with a ‘*maiden*.’
Marriage stands on the same footing as *using*; and just as the cloth
that has been used and worn cannot be returned to the seller oven within
ten days, so the maiden also who has been married cannot be abandoned.

This subject we shall deal with again under 9.47.—(227)


