+++
title = "228 यस्मिन् यस्मिन्"

+++
The law relating to rescission within ten days is not restricted to
transactions among tradesmen; it is applicable also to compacts relating
to wages, interest and other kinds of transaction. The repetition of the
pronoun in the phrase ‘*yasmin yasmin*’ indicates that all kinds of
transaction are meant to be included.

This is an example of ‘extended application.’

When a compact has been entered into, and the work agreed upon has been
commenced, then it is that repentance sets in. When a compact has been
entered into verbally, the parties should therefore wait for ten days,
to see if there is repentance on either side.

In a case however where after money has been borrowed on interest, or a
priest has been appointed, and the wages have been paid,—if a quarrel
arises in regard to the terms of the compact,—then this case does not
come within the rule here laid down;—so say some people; on the ground
that what has been done cannot be undone.

This however is not right. It is only when a work has been *completed*
that it is regarded as ‘done,’—and not only when it *has been begun*;
because the past-participial affix in the term ‘done’ does not connote
*commencement* (but *accomplishment*), and there is no ground for
rejecting its primary connotation. As for the argument that ‘what has
been done cannot be undone’;—as a matter of fact, even when an act has
been *done*, if there is any obstruction in the way of the due
appearance of its effects, it is regarded to be as good as ‘undone.’ For
instance, when the food that has been eaten is thrown out.

Even in the case of ordinary things of the world, when they are found to
be amenable to the rules laid down in the scriptures, promulgation or
revocation must proceed on these same scriptural lines. Hence even
though the things may have become accomplished, there may be revocation.
Consequently, even after a money-transaction has been completed and the
money has been taken home by the borrower, it shall be brought back, if
either party shows signs of repentance. If there has been any
deterioration or expenditure, these shall he borne by the party
concerned, in accordance with the law laid down in the scriptures. It is
for this reason that some people hold that by merely receiving the loan,
the borrower becomes liable to a month’s interest.

In cases of mortgage also—when things are mortgaged on the understanding
that they shall he used for a stipulated time,—tho transaction is
revoked if there is repentance within ten days. As regards the
appointment of priests, it is like the marriage of girls. There can be
revocation after ten days only when there had been a compact; but only
if there is another scriptural text bearing on this subject.—(228)


