+++
title = "231 गोपः क्षीरभृतो"

+++
The author is going to describe the details regarding the ‘*safe
keeping*’ (mentioned in the preceding verse).

One who ‘keeps’ the ‘cattle’ is the ‘*cattle-keeper*,’ the herdsman.
Sometimes he is engaged on fooding and other kinds of wages, and
sometimes on milk. Of these he who is ‘*paid with milk shall milk the
best*—*varām*—*out of ten*’;—or the ‘*worst*,’ ‘*avarām*,’—the initial
‘a’ being mixed up with the preceding vowel.

The wages are to be commensurate with the labour involved in the
keeping. If the man receives nothing else,—in the shape of
subsistence,—he shall take the milk of one cow. The exact wages, more or
less, of the man shall be determined according to this rate. Thus for
the work of looking after milch and non-milch cows, heifers, bulls and
calves, the owner shall apportion to the keeper sometimes the third, and
sometimes the fourth, part of the entire milk-produce.

This verse is meant only to alîord some indication of the subject. In
fact in each individual case, local custom has got to be followed.

If the herdsman of the village omits to look after the eattle, with the
idea of having his wages fixed beforehand, then he shall not. milk one
of the ten cows, without having obtained the owner’s permission.

‘*With the owner’s permission*’;—this has been added for the purpose of
precluding the possibility of the keeper taking the milk in lieu of the
‘fooding’ on which he has been engaged. The meaning is that if he milks
the cow without the owner’s permission, he shall he punished.

‘*This*’—*i.e*., what has been just mentioned—‘*shall be the wages if he
receive no other wages*’; *i.e*., this shall be the wages of the keeper
engaged ‘on milk.’

‘*Hired*’—*i.e*., he who takes up the work of keeping the cattle for the
purpose of making a living, and not for acquiring spiritual merit.

Or, the meaning of the verse may he that “if the man, entirely out of
his own wish, takes the milk of every tenth cow, he shall he regarded as
a thief; but if he has obtained the owner’s permission, then it becomes
his due ‘wages,’ and there is nothing wrong.”

“But in the case mentioned in the verse also, if the man took the milk
without the owner’s permission, he would be doing something wrong.”

True; but in this case he would be only liable to punishment, and he
would not be a ‘thief’; while in the other case he would be either a
‘thief’ or a ‘misappropriator of a trust.’

This verse should have gone before; some people read it later on.—(231)


