+++
title = "240 पथि क्षेत्रे"

+++
‘*In an enclosed field, either on the road-side, or near the village*’—
within the pasture-ground;—the term ‘*anta*’ means *near*;—if the cattle
should eat the crops,—and the keeper be on the spot,—then he should ‘*be
fined* *a* *hundred*’, since no fine could be imposed upon the cattle;
so also when the keeper is close by, if he is too much engrossed in his
family-affairs, and does not send any hired person to see to the cattle.

‘*Cattle without a keeper*’ should he ‘*driven off*’ with a stick or
some such thing; and they shall not he punished. ‘*Cattle without a
keeper*’ that are meant here are such calves as have been sot free in
connection with certain religious rites. (These belong to no one). In
the case of other cattle roaming about without a keeper, punishment
shall he inflicted upon the owner.

Or, we may read ‘*aparivṛtā*,’ ‘*unenclosed*,’ ‘*unfenced*,’ *for*
‘*parivṛtā*,’ ‘*enclosed*,’ and ‘*sapāla*’ may be taken as standing for
‘*the owner along with the keeper*,’—the compound ‘*sapāla*’ meaning a
party other than the one denoted by the terms of the compound, *i.e.,
one along with the keeper*—and the question arising ‘who is to be
punished in this case?’—the answer is that both the owner of the field
and the keeper of the cattle should ho punished;—tho owner being
punished for the fault of having cultivated the field near the road-side
and not fencing it; if it had been fenced, how could the crops have been
eaten?

‘*Cattle without a keeper*’—which may have strayed from the herd—should
be driven off. Says Gautama (12.21)—‘When there is an unfenced field on
the road-side, punishment shall be inflicted on the keeper and on the
cultivator of the field.’—(240)


