+++
title = "241 क्षेत्रेष्व् अन्येषु"

+++
In the case of ‘*other fields*’—*i.e*., other than those on the
road-side or near the village;—if the crops are eaten, the fine shall be
a ‘*paṇa and a quarter*.’

“The fine should be a small one, in the case of a field close by, as
compared to that in the cue of one that can be reached after traversing
a long distance, or which is situated outside the village. In the latter
case the punishment should be heavy. For in this case there can be no
excuse for the cattle being allowed to enter the field.”

There is no force in this; if a heavy fine were not inflicted in the
case of fields close by, then every day, when the cattle would be going
out or coming in, they would destroy all the fields near the village;
while if there is a heavy fine imposed, people would be afraid of it and
would take special care to keep them away. In the case of remoter
fields, it is only seldom that cattle are taken to graze so far for the
sake of some particular kind of grass; hence only a slight fine has been
prescribed in this case.

In the case of these fields also, cattle without a keeper should be
driven off.

In all cases the loss to the owner of the field has to be made good, the
exact amount being determined by experts.

‘*Kṣetrika*’ is *one who has possession of the field*; the word being
formed with the affix ‘*ṭhak*,’ the original term ‘*kṣetra*’ belonging
to the ‘*vrīhyādi*’ group.

‘*Such is the established rule*’—laid down on the subject.

The use of the phrase ‘*in all cases*’ indicates that in the case of
cattle without a creeper also, the loss has to be made good to the owner
of the field by the owner of the cattle.

Though the term ‘*cattle*,’ ‘*paśu*,’ includes all such animals as the
buffalo, the goat, the sheep, the camel, the ass and so forth,—yet, on
the strength of the words of another *Smṛti*, it is restricted to *cows*
only. Gautama (12.24-25) prescribes other fines in the case of animals
other than the cow—‘In the case of the horse and the buffalo, the fine
is to be ten, while in that of goats and sheep two each.’—(241)


