+++
title = "245 सीमाम् प्रति"

+++
‘*Dispute regarding boundaries*,’—*i.e*., dispute on account of
boundary: the particle ‘*prati*’ being a preposition, governs the
accusative, according to Pāṇini 1.4.90: specially as the cause of a
thing also can he spoken of as its characteristic feature.

‘*Boundary*’,—the limit of villages, their division, the exact
determination of their extent.

‘*Shall settle it*’—decide it,—‘*during the month of Jyeṣṭha*.’

The text adds the reason why the boundary should be settled during this
particular month:—‘*when the land-marks are distinctly perceptible*’—
Boundary-marks are going to be described below; such as those consisting
of clods of stone or things of that kind, and also thickets of grass and
the like. Before the advent of the said month, while grass is growing on
all sides, no difference could be perceived between grounds marked by a
stone-piece and other grounds. When however, the boundary is marked by a
piece of stone, if no grasses are visible, then the boundary is easily
determined. Similarly In cases where demarcation has been done by
creepers and thickets, the boundary should be settled before the advent
of spring; for when trees and creepers are burnt down by forest-fires
during the spring, no distinction could be perceived.

In as much as the text has put forward a reason for settling the dispute
during a certain month, it is to be concluded that in a case where the
marks are easily perceptible, the king should not wait for any
particular month, thereby affording time to the parties concerned. It is
only for the purpose of finding the necessary marks that one need wait
for any particular month. This is the sole purpose served by the mention
of the month of *Jyeṣṭha*.—(245)


