+++
title = "252 एतैर् लिङ्गैर्"

+++
When there is a dispute between two persons, inhabitants of two
villages, the boundary is ascertained by means of the above-mentioned
marks.

‘*Long-continued possession*’;—*i.e*, possession whose beginning cannot
be traced, and not only ‘possession’ for *three generations*; the
validity of the latter having been rejected above, Under verse 119; and
also because the boundary of a village being public property, it is
quite possible for encroachments being ignored for three generations.
Some people read verse 149 without the mention of ‘boundary’; according
to these, the validity of ‘possession’ as a proof is established in all
eases; and yet it has had to be reiterated here, because, in view of the
enumeration of the proofs of boundary, it might he thought that
‘possession’ is not a proof at all.

“What is the *stream of water* that is mentioned as an indication of the
boundary?”

Just as in the case of new settlements, other various boundary-marks are
set up, in the same manner, a flowing water-canal also should be built.

Or, the meaning may be that when a stream of water divides two villages,
if, in one part of the village; that stream of water is found to be
recognised, as the boundary, and there is dispute in another part,—in
this case, the stream should be accepted as the indicative of the true
boundary in the latter case also. Or, this may be taken as referring to
a very large village; the sense being that when a village is located on
one side of a river, it cannot he open to any inhabitant of the other
bank to assert that he has his lands in the village on the

opposite side also. Or, the meaning may be that even when a certain part
of a village has been cut off by a running stream, that same stream
shall continue to serve as the boundary between the two
villages,—provided that the portion cut off is a small one.—(252)

VERSE CCLIII

If, even on the inspection of the marks, there should be a doubt, the
settlement of the dispute regarding boundaries shall be entirely
dependent upon witnesses.—(253)

*Bhāṣya*.

“How can there be a doubt, when the marks are there?”

If some one were to come and secretly remove the hidden marks to another
place, this would give rise to uncertainty. And as for the open public
marks—in the shape of the *Nyagrodha* and other trees,—it is not that
these trees are to be found on boundaries only; as a matter of fact,
they grow in other places also. It is for these reasons that the said
marks are not always reliable, and hence doubts are likely to arise.

In a case where there is no possibility of such invalidating
circumstances, the marks themselves are sufficient proof.

‘*Dependent upon witnesses*’—*i.e*., due to witnesses. The settlement,
ascertainment, is such as has the witnesses alone for its basis. The
meaning of the verse is that in cases where the marks are doubtful, or
where there are no marks at all, the dispute regarding boundaries can be
settled only by oral testimony.—(253).

VERSE CCLIV

Witnesses regarding boundaries shall be questioned in regard to the
boundary-marks, in the presence of an assembly of villagers and also of
the two contending parties.—(254)


