+++
title = "275 मातरम् पितरम्"

+++
‘*Alienating*’ means *estranging* (sowing dissension), by false
insinuations; *e.g*., when one tries to sow dissension by making such
assertions as—‘This mother of yours has no love for you, she has a great
hankering after her other son, and has secretly given him a golden
ring.’ Similarly when he sows dissension between the father and son, or
between the husband and wife, or between brothers, or between the
preceptor and disciple.

The term ‘*child*’ has been mentioned with a view to indicate the other
member in the dissension. If this were not added, the punishment would
apply only to one who would alienate the ‘mother’ from her son,—and not
to one who would alienate the ‘son’ from his mother; though ‘alienation’
is always between two parties, yet that party is spoken of as being
‘alienated’ through whom the estrangement is attempted. Under the
circumstances, if the ‘child’ were not mentioned, the punishment would
apply only to one who would ‘alienate the *mother*’ by saying—‘this son
of yours is not devoted to you, and is ill-behaved,’—and not to one who
would ‘alienate’ the *son*, in the manner described before.

Others have explained the word ‘*ākṣārayan*’ as *causing mental
suffering*; by making such statements as—‘I am going away from the
country for the purpose of acquiring learning or wealth,’—when the fear
of the going away of the son causes pain to the father and others; and
hence this should not be done.

As regards the ‘preceptor,’ so long as he is alive, one should not go
over to another, specially so long as he does not permit him to do so.
In a case where the disciple causes mental suffering to his preceptor,
by disrespect and such acts,—the man cannot escape by paying the fine of
a hundred only; as ‘disregarding of the preceptor’ has been held to be a
very serious offence.

The ‘*alienating*’ of the loving wife with children is attempted by
telling her that her husband is going to marry another woman. Similarly
that of the son with excellent qualities, by representing him to be
otherwise.

If in any way, one does not give the way to his preceptor, bis fine
shall be one hundred.—(275)


