+++
title = "281 सहासनम् अभिप्रेप्सुर्"

+++
‘*Superior*’—i.e., the Brāhmaṇa, who is always ‘superior’ by reason of
his caste, even though he be ‘inferior’ on account of his bad character.
In the case of the other castes ‘superiority’ and ‘inferiority’ are
relative and comparative (so that everyone of them may be ‘superior’ and
also ‘inferior’). It is for this reason that the text has used the term
‘lowborn,’ where the term ‘born’ shows that what is meant is
‘inferiority’ by *birth*; hence on account of its proximity, the
‘superiority’ also should be understood to be by *birth*. This
superiority by *birth* belongs to the Brāhmaṇa, irrespectively of other
considerations, and he is never ‘inferior.’ From all which it follows
that the punishment here laid down is for the *Śūdra* who occupies the
same seat with the *Brāhmaṇa*.

‘*Hips*,’—buttocks;—‘*branded*’ upon that. This ‘branding’ is to be not
mere marking with lime or saffron or such things; but it is to be
indicative of the man’s having undergone the punishment; so that others
might fight shy of the same transgression. Hence the marking prescribed
is one that is ineffaceable, and should he done with an iron-nail or
some such thing; as is going to be laid down below (8.352)—‘Punishments
that strike terror, etc., etc.’

He should also be ‘*banished*’ from the kingdom.

‘*Sphik*’ is the name of a part of the buttocks, on both the right and
the left side. This he ‘*shall have cut off*.’ In as much as this is an
alternative to ‘branding,’ it is only the part, and not the entire
buttock, that is to be cut off.

‘*Tries to occupy*’;—the man is to be punished not merely for *trying*
to do so, but only when he has actually occupied it; because the mere
*wish* or *attempt* can be hidden (and hence may not he discovered), and
also because the penalty laid down is very severe.—(281)


