+++
title = "284 त्वग्भेदकः शतम्"

+++
What is here laid down pertains to offences committed among the
twice-born men themselves, as also between two *Śūdras*.

When one only ‘*breaks*’ or pierces the skin, and fetches no blood, the
fine is one hundred.

The same also when blood flows out. Though no blood can flow out unless
the skin has been broken, yet the limitation on the fine has been laid
down with a view to preclude the idea that since the hurt is more
serious, the punishment should he heavier.

Others hold that this has been added in view of the fact that blood
flows also out of the ear, the nostrils and such other pans, as also out
of the outer skin (and the rule is meant to apply to this latter ease).

This however is not right. Because in a case where there is internal
hurt, the pain is very severe, and the punishment therefore should be
proportionately heavy. Hence what is meant is that the fine of one
hundred shall be inflicted in a case where only a small quantity of
blood has flown out.

In the case of head-breaking, the punishment shall be the same as that
in the case of cutting the flesh.

The term ‘*niṣka*’ here stands for a measure of gold, as has been
already explained before.

‘*The breaker of bones should be banished*,’;—*i.e*., one who causes the
bone to be broken. The compound ‘*asthibhedakaḥ*’ should be explained by
compounding ‘*asthi*’ (‘*bone*’) with the term ‘*bheda*’ which ends with
the ‘*ghañ*’ affix, and then adding the causal affix in the sense of
‘*doing*’ to the compound thus formed (*i.e*., ‘*asthibhedam karoti iti
asthibhedakaḥ*’).

‘Banishment’ is an alternative to ‘Death.’ In works dealing with the
science of government, in the sections dealing with punishments, we find
the latter penalty laid down; for instance, in the works of *Bṛhaspati*
and *Uśanas*. So ‘banishment’ applies to the case of Brāhmaṇas, and
‘death’ to that of others.—(284)


