+++
title = "292 छेदने चैव"

+++
**(verses 8.291-292)  
**

The text proceeds to show the cases where there is no offence.

‘*Nāsya*’ is that which pertains to the nose; the term ending in the
affix ‘*yat*,’ which is added because the basic noun ‘*nāsā*’ is the
name of a limb of the body. It stands for the string that passes through
the nostrils of the bullocks, as also for the *bridle* of the horse, or
the *goad* of the elephant—When this has ‘*snapped*.’

‘*When the yoke is broken*’;—‘yoke’ is the name of a piece of wood
forming part of the cart. The compound ‘*chinnanāsyā*,’ taken as
*Bahuvrīhi*, refers to the cart or to the animal, both of these being
connected with it, either directly or indirectly.

‘*When it turns sideways or backwards*,’—*i.e*., when the cart so turns.
When, either on account of the uneven ground, or by reason of the animal
having taken fright, the cart turns either sideways or backwards, and
some one happens to be hurt,—there lies no offence. The driver can sec
and guard against things only in front of him; so that when the cart
turns sideways, how can ho sec and avoid striking against anything that
may be there?

‘*Turning backwards*’ means *turning round*.

Others explain this phrase to mean that no offence lies in a case where
the injured party has turned sideways, while the cart is going on its
straight course; and ‘*pratimukha*’ they explain as ‘in front.’ The
reason for there being no offence in this case is that it is the fault
of the injured person himself why he did not make way for the cart
coining in front of himself.

‘*Axle*’ and ‘*wheel*’ are well known parts of the cart.

‘*Fittings*’— the leather thongs with which the wooden parts of the
chariot are tied up.

‘*Yoking strap*’— the piece of wood on the neck of the animal.

‘*Bridle*’—the string with which the movements of the yoked animals are
controlled.

‘*Loud cry*’—‘*get out of the way*’—*i.e*., move off. When the animals
have gone out of hand, if the driver keeps on crying ‘get out of the
way,’ if some one coming by that way happens to be hurt, the fault does
not lie with the driver.—(291-292)


