+++
title = "296 मनुष्यमारणे क्षिप्रम्"

+++
If on account of the driver being in the position above described, a man
happens to be killed by the cart or by the animals yoked to it, then his
‘*guilt*’—*i.e*., his punishment—‘*would be* *similar to that of the
thief*.’

Though the punishment laid down for the thief is either ‘death’ or
‘confiscation of the entire property’ and so forth, yet in the present
context it is the *fine* that is meant, and not ‘death’; as is clear
from the words—‘*Half of that in the case of the larger animals*,’—
since it is only of the *fine* that there can be a ‘half.’

The ‘fine’ for the ‘thief’ has been held to be the ‘highest amercement,’
on the ground that the fine for killing smaller animals, which occupy
the third place in the scale—having been put down at ‘two hundred,’ it
is only right that in the case of human beings, who occupy the first
place in the scale, it should be the ‘highest amercement.’

‘*Animals*,’—living beings, such as man, beasts and birds,etc.

‘*Larger*’;—in the case of ‘cows,’ ‘largeness’ consists in their
superior quality, while in that of the elephant and other animals, it
consists in their size.

The phrase ‘*and the like*’ is meant to include the ass, the mule, the
tiger and others.

Our opinion on this point however is as follows:—If the other
punishments of the ‘thief’ were not meant to be applicable to the
present case, then the author would have simply mentioned ‘a thousand’
as the fine. The mention of the ‘*half*’ may justify the exclusion of
the penalty of ‘death’; but all the other penalties,—such as
‘confiscation of the entire property,’ and so forth—that have been
prescribed in the case of the thief,—must be taken as meant to be
applicable to the case of men.

“It cannot be right to apply to the case of man-killing any penalty
other than ‘death’; because under 8.323 below, it is clearly laid down
in so many words that ‘death’ shall be the penalty in the case of
killing a man. Under the circumstances, why should the other explanation
(whereby only the other penalties are made applicable) be accepted,
simply because the term ‘half’ happens to be used in another sentence?
It would be far better to attribute some other figurative meaning to the
term ‘half’ itself.”

This would be true if there were any other way of construing the term
‘half’ with ‘death.’ ‘Punishment similar to that of the thief’ having
been prescribed, it would not be right to take it to mean one thing
(*death*) in the first sentence and another thing (*fine*, etc.) in the
second.—(296)


