+++
title = "297 क्षुद्रकाणाम् पशूनाम्"

+++
Animals of small size are called ‘*petty*’; these may, in some cases, be
‘*petty*’ in age,—as in the case of the calf, the elephant-cub and. so
forth; and in others they may he ‘petty’ in quality,—as the ram and such
animals. As for the latter, the author is going to lay down ‘five
*māṣas*’ as the fine for killing goat and sheep. Hence the present text
must be taken as referring to the small-sized animals other than those
two.

‘*Auspicious quadrupeds*’ are the deer and similar animals; which are
‘*auspicious*’ in shape, as well as quality; and ‘*birds*,’ such as the
swan, the parrot and so forth. And the ‘inauspicious quadrupeds and
birds’ are the crow, the owl, the jackal and so forth.

The term ‘*paśu*’ here stands for *quadrupeds*.

People have held that the penalties laid down here refer to ‘hurt’ in
general, and not to ‘hurt’ caused by *conveyances*, which form the
subject-matter of the context. Because, it is contended, the treatment
of the subject of ‘hurt caused by conveyances’ was finished at verse
295,—where it was declared that the punishment (for hurt caused by
conveyances) has been ‘*vicāritaḥ*,’ which means that ‘its consideration
has been finished.’ And hence it is held that what is declared in the
present verse has no connection with that context.

Similarly under verse 290, in the sentence ‘half of that in the case of
the larger animals,’ the penalty spoken of as ‘half’ should, on the
strength of other *Smṛtis*, be taken as referring to the cutting off of
the hand or some such limb, which would he a minor form of ‘death’ (and
hence ‘half’).—(297)


