+++
title = "302 परमं यत्नम्"

+++
It is possible that a certain king may be too merciful and hence not
undertake the work of suppressing thieves, regarding it to be a cruel
act of injury; hence with a view to prompt such a king to do his duty,
the text puts forward a valedictory passage appraising the suppression
of thieves. The meaning is that the act of punishing thieves does not
involve anything wrong in the way in which the ‘injury of living beings’
does; on the contrary, in the case of thieves, it is the act of
inflicting hurt on them which serves a visibly useful purpose and
enhances the fame of the king.

In the present work several purely valedictory passages have been
introduced with a view to indicate that it belongs to the same category
as the *Veda*, in which most of the injunctions are found to be
accompanied by valedictory passages; so that from similarity to this
latter, it would be thought that what is said in the text is sanctioned
by the Veda. Further, there are certain persons who become more quickly
prompted to a certain course of action by the force of valedictory
descriptions.

‘*Best efforts*’—He should have recourse to the bast and most vigilant
methods; employing spies to try their best to track them down directly
as well as openly.

‘*Stena*’ is *thief*.

‘*Nigraha, suppression*’ means *putting down* by such means as death,
imprisonment and the like.

If this is done, the king acquires ‘*fame*’, good name; all the people
saying—‘The kingdom of this king is free from troubles,—thieves do not
attack the people,—night is like day.’

‘*The kingdom prospers*.’—‘Kingdom’ means the *country*, and when its
inhabitants are not attacked by thieves, they prosper in wealth and
become affluent, and inhabitants of other countries also are attracted
to settle in this kingdom on account of its being free from troubles;
and thus also ‘*the kingdom prospers*.’—(302)


