+++
title = "318 राजभिः कृतदण्डास्"

+++
It has been said above that by suppressing criminals the King protects
the well-behaved. This same idea is further clearly stated.

Those on whom punishments have been inflicted by the King,—such men
‘*having committed crimes, become freed from guilt*,’ by the punishment
meted out by the King; *i.e*., their sin becomes set aside.

Their sins set aside, they go to heaven, by virtue of those acts of
theirs which entitle them to enter heaven. A serious crime stands in the
way of the fruition of meritorions acts.

Like the men who are ‘*well-behaved*’—those who constantly perform
meritorious acts; and are hence ‘*good*’—righteous.

The difference between the two is that in the case of the good men,
there has been no guilt at all, while in the case of criminals, it has
come about, but has been destroyed by the punishment; so that in the
former case there is prior negation, while in the latter there is
negation by destruction.

The use of the term ‘*men*’ in the text indicates that what is stated
here does not refer to *thieves* only.

The term ‘punishment’ however continues to stand for *corporeal
punishment*., and hence does not go beyond the sense in which it has
been used in the present context.

Punishment in the form of fine’s comes useful to the king,—that being
his means of livelihood; but in the ease of corporeal punishment it
cannot be denied that if it is useful to any one; it must be so to the
person punished; because the hurt inflicted therein affects the man’s
skin.

In this connection, people may have the following idea:—“Protection of
the people is not possible without hurting (criminals), and protection
serves the purposes of the king; how then can the corporeal punishment
be held to serve the purpose of the person punished?”

Is this argument meant to deny the palpable fact that *protection* is
useful for the *protected people*? Certainly it cannot be said that the
king employs all his officers only for the purposes of his own
protection. If again, the corporeal punishment served the useful purpose
of ‘protection’ only, it could not he regarded as useful for the person
punished. Further, why should ‘protection’ of the people be not possible
without the ‘hurt’ (involved in the punishment)? If the hurt is
inflicted with the idea that if the man were not punished, he would
repeat the act,—this purpose could be served even by reprimanding and
such other means. If the idea he that on seeing him punished others
would desist from similar acts,—the suffering meant to be caused could
be brought about even by lines. Then again, even though criminals are
punished, thousands of men are found to do the same act again and again.

From all this it follows that the corporeal punishment, while ‘ending to
‘protection’ (of the people), has to be regarded as serving the purpose
of purifying the person punished. It is for this reason that there are
rules laid down regarding the cutting off of limbs and other forms of
corporeal punishment. All this produces an invisible effeet in the
persons punished, and at the same time serves the purposes of the king
(in the form of protection).

Thus it is established that the criminals become absolved from guilt
only when there is corporeal punishment, and not when they are only
fined.

It is for this same reason that in connection with the most heinous
offenders, whoso entire property has been confiscated, and who have, by
way of punishment, been made to stand in water,—*branding* has been
prescribed, with a view to guard against people associating with them.
If they became purified by the fine, any such branding would be futile.

In the present context, the special rules that have been laid down in
regard to the criminal who has surrendered himself, and has not been
arrested and brought up for trial, may refer to *thieves* only; but what
is said in the present verse is meant to apply to *all* corporeal
punishments.—(318)


