+++
title = "321 तथा धरिममेयानाम्"

+++
‘*Dharima*’—scales;—things weighed by means of scales are called
‘*dhrimameya*.’

In as much as clarified butter and other liquid substances are weighed
by the seer and other measures, people might think that solid substances
are not meant here; hence the author has added—‘*gold, silver and the
rest*.’

Since *silver* would have been included under the phrase ‘*and the
rest*,’ its special mention may be taken to indicate that what are meant
are only such things as are equal to it in value; it is thus that coral
and other precious stones become included, but not copper, iron and Such
things.

Of these things, if more than a hundred is stolen, there shall be
‘*immolation*.’

“What is it of which there should be a *hundred*? A hundred ‘*palas*’ or
‘*karṣas*’ or ‘*kārṣāpaṇas*’?”

Some people say that ‘hundred *palas*’ are meant.

But there is no ground available for restricting it to any particular
measure. Hence it should be taken as referring to that particular
measure which, in the country concerned, happens to be the standard of
weighment by scales. The expression ‘a hundred of gold’ pertains, in
some places, to ‘*tolās*’ and in others to ‘*palas*’; hence the rule is
to be interpreted in accordance with local usage.

‘*Also in the ease of fine clothes*,’—snoh as silken and coloured
raiments; here also we have to construe the words—

‘*if there are more than a hundred, there shall be immolation*.’ In the
case of *Sārīs* two pieces (pair) are counted as ‘one,’ while in that of
flowered wrappers and such other clothes, it is only one piece.

“In as much as the phrase ‘*gold, silver and the rest*’ would have
sufficed to express what is meant, it was entirety useless to add the
term ‘*things weighed by scales*.’

It has been added for the purpose of including such high-priced things
as camphor, *aguru*, musk and so forth. The phrase ‘and the rest’ (used
along with ‘gold and silver’) includes only the igneous substances
(metals), or only such substances as are weighed in ‘*niṣkas*’ and other
measures, which are not applicable to camphor and other like things.

Though the limit of ‘a hundred’ is put down in regard to both gold and
silver, yet, in actual practice a distinction has to be made in the
penalty inflicted in the two cases; just as there is in the expiatory
rite imposed in connection with them; and this for the simple reason
that things distinctly unequal should not be treated as equal. Hence in
the case of silver, there is to be ‘immolation’ only if the value of the
quantity stolen is equivalent to ‘a hundred of gold.’

In the case of camphor and other things, the number ‘hundred’ would
pertain to ‘*palas*.’—(321)


