+++
title = "324 महापशूनां हरणे"

+++
‘*Large animals*,’—the elephant, the horse and so forth. For stealing
these the punishment is to be determined in accordance with ‘*the time
and the purpose*.’

“In connection with all punishments, it has been declared that the time
should be taken into consideration; *e.g*., it is said—‘In the
inflicting of punishments, the king shall take into consideration, the
time, place, age and capacity?”

True; in ordinary cases the nature of the punishment is already fixed,
and the said circumstances are taken into consideration only for the
purpose of determining the exact degree of that punishment; *e.g*., in
cases where the penalty is put down as ‘immolation,’ whether it is to be
actual *death* or only *beating*, could be determined by circumstances.
In the case in question on the other hand, the nature of the punishment
is peculiarly variable; *e.g*., even though the sword may be worth only
twenty *paṇas*, yet if it is stolen at a time when an enemy with
uplifted weapon is near at hand,—the punishment would be *death*; in
view of the time and the extremely useful purpose that would have been
served by the stolen sword; while under other circumstances, there would
be only a fine, either double, or eleven times, the value of the sword.
Similarly in the case of a medicine that is not easily available, and is
extremely useful, being stolen at the very time at which it was going to
be used,—or if, when easily available, it is stolen at the time when it
has been just boiled, and if not taken at that very time, would cause
great suffering to the patient,—the punishment in such cases would be
most severe; in other cases, it would be small. There could be no such
diversity unless there be some sort of difference in the cases.
Otherwise it would suffice to put down only one verse as embodying the
whole law of punishments. Hence the following statements have to be
made—‘At the time of war, the penalty for stealing a horse and such
animals would depend on the needs of the king;—in the case of weapons
needed by the king, it would be forgiven in some oases, while in others
the punishment meted out would he very severe;—in the case of cows and
buffaloes belonging to the people, the theft should never be forgiven by
the king;—in the ease of horses too, it would all depend upon the
purpose served by them; *e.g*., if the war is being waged in a hilly
country, the horse would not be of much use there; so that if it be
stolen, the punishment should not he very severe. Thus our sole guide in
this matter is the maxim *that the king shall determine the penalty
after considering the time*.—(324)


