+++
title = "332 स्यात् साहसम्"

+++
The taking away of what belongs to another is called ‘theft’; and on
account of the denotation, of the root from which the word is derived,
one who commits ‘theft’ is a ‘thief.’ But for cases of a particular kind
of theft, special provisions have been made; that is why we have the
present texts. In fact merely ‘taking what belongs to another’ cannot be
‘theft,’ because if it were, then in cases of debts and deposits also,
punishments for ‘theft’ would have to be inflicted. The present texts
have used a different name (‘*sāhasa*,’ ‘robbery,’ in place of
‘*steya*,’ ‘theft’) with a view to laying down different forms of
punishment.

‘*Is denied*,’—*i.e*., having done the act, the man says ‘I have not
done it.’

‘*The act is committed*’—such as causes pain to others, *e.g*., tearing
clothes, setting (ire, taking away property and so forth. In the case of
‘setting fire,’ though there is no ‘taking away of property,’ yet it is
regarded as ‘theft,’ because it is done secretly, and denied afterwards.
But in cases of ‘theft,’ the punishment is determined by the nature of
the article stolen; this would, therefore, not be applicable to the case
of ‘setting fire.’ It is for this reason that the present section has
been separated from that on ‘Theft.’

‘*Act done with violence*’;—since the text mentions ‘act’ in general,
acts other than ‘the taking away of other’s property’ also, when clone
with violence, would come under ‘robbery.’

“What punishment could there be in the case of the setting of fire, and
such acts, when clone *without violence*?”

This we shall explain under the section on ‘Extirpation of Criminals.’

It is for this reason that, in a case where a house has been broken
into, but nothing stolen, they declare the punishment to be what is laid
down under ‘Extirpation of Criminals.’ Otherwise, this should have come
under ‘*Theft*’ itself.—(332)


