+++
title = "333 यस् त्व्"

+++
‘*These things*’—yarns and the rest.

‘*Prepared*:’—when the time for their being put to use,—in the form of
being given away or enjoyed—is near at hand. Or it may mean ‘*refined*,’
*i.e*., ‘having fresh capacity produced in them.’ For instance, after
the yarn is at first handed over to the weaver for being woven into
cloth, it is doubled up, then turned up and so forth; the curd becomes
‘refined’ by having pepper, sugar and other things mixed with it;
similarly milk, clarified butter and so forth.

In these eases the fine shall be ‘one hundred.’

If the reading is ‘? *dyam*’ in place of ‘*śatam*,’ then the fine shall
consist of the ‘first amercement.’

‘*Fire from the home*’—the fire kindled for the purpose of cooking
meals; or the fire kindled in connection with the *Agnihotra* offerings;
or the fire that is set up, without consecration, for the convenience of
the cold-stricken poor. The same punishment applies to the case of all
kinds of fire,—kindled at the time of cooking, or for relieving the cold
of the poor, or for making sacrificial offerings,—be the quantity of
fire stolen large or small.

Though under verse 326 where punishment for the stealing of ‘yarns’ and
other things is laid down, we have the phrase ‘and other things’ (which
might include Fire also), yet there can be no determination of its
‘value,’ since there is no buying or selling of it (so that ‘double the
value’ could not be determined). Though it would he possible to fix the
fine at a sum which would be the double of that which would enable a
sufficient quantity of fire to be kindled, or which would constitute the
‘sacrificial fee’ necessary for the rekindling of the fire.

In addition to this fine, the necessity of satisfying the owner remains
(as laid down under 288 above).

Thus then, in the case of the stealing of the sacrificial fire-triad,
the thief shall pay to the owner of the fire the amount that would be
needed for the re-kindling rites and for the expiatory rites necessary
under the circumstances.

For these reasons the punishment prescribed in the present verse must be
taken as referring to the fire kindled for household purposes; since
that would be of small consequence. In the case of the sacrificial fire,
the fine must be ‘double the value’ (as laid down in 329). Similarly in
the case of the theft of such minor sacrificial accessories as kuśa,
pebbles and such other things,—whose absence does not disqualify the
sacrificer,—there should be cutting off of the limb,—says Śaṅkha. When
however the fires themselves are stolen, the man becomes entirely
incapacitated; why then should not the punishment in this case be most
heavy?—(333)


