+++
title = "338 ब्राह्मणस्य चतुःषष्टिः"

+++
**(verses 8.337-338)**

‘*When he is cognisant of the good or bad quality of the act*’;—this
points out the reason for what is here laid down; and from this it is
clear that the penalty here prescribed is meant for the educated. Thus
then, if for a guilt an ordinary man is fined one ‘*Kārṣāpaṇa*,’ the
learned *Śūdra* incurs the ‘*eight-fold guilt*;’—that is, that which is
connected with the number ‘eight,’ or that which is folded, multiplied,
eight times. In either case the term ‘*eight-fold*’ means that the
educated Śūdra’s guilt is eight times that of the ordinary man.

That of the *Vaiśya* is double that of the *Śūdra*; since he is himself
entitled to study the Veda and acquire the necessary knowledge, while
the *Śūdra* can learn only a little through serving or associating with
the *Brāhmam*.

As for the *Kṣatriya*, though, in the point of knowledge, he stands on
the same footing as the *Vaiśya*, yet, in as much as the protecting of
people forms part of his duty, his guilt is double that of the *Vaiśya*.

As regards the *Brāhmaṇa*, the author cannot be content with prescribing
any amount of penalty,—‘*sixty-four*,—*hundred,—hundred and
twenty-eight*.’ Since it is his duty to expound the duties of men and
instruct them, and thus guard them against evil.

What blame can attach to the common man, who is on the same level as the
lower animals? Uneducated men cannot know the good or bad character of
actions, and hence they are led to do what should not he done. If,
however, the educated men were also to behave in the same manner, then
alas! the world would be doomed! As there would be no third man to teach
men their duty,—it having been declared that—‘only two men are known in
the world—the King and the learned Brāhmaṇa.’ For the king, a heavy
punishment having been already prescribed in the preceding verse, the
present verse lays it down for the Brāhmaṇa.

Thus all that the present verse enjoins is *heavier punishment* (for the
Brāhmaṇa), and the exact numbers are not to be taken literally. Because
so far as the Brāhmaṇa is concerned, it has been declared that there can
be no limit to his punishment. Nor would it be right to lay down any
option—‘this or that’—in this case \[as it would be if the words were
taken literally \]; as there would be nothing to determine which of them
it should be in any particular case; since both the options being
equally authoritative, it would be impossible to find any case in which
the lower penalty could be imposed. What king is there, for instance,
who would accept only a sixty-four-fold fine, and give up one the double
of that figure? Further, one would have been admissible in the case only
if punishments were meant to serve a transcendental purpose; as a matter
of fact however, they are not meant to serve any transcendental purpose,
as we have already explained. Says Gautama (12.17)—‘For the educated
there should be heavier punishment.’ For these reasons the very
indefiniteness of the assertion deprives it of injunctive force. Nor
would it he right to take the option as determined by the qualifications
of the culprit; as this has been already laid down under verse 232, *et
seq*.

Further, the fact of the present passage being an injunction is
indicated by the purpose served by it; and as that purpose is served by
its being taken as prescribing *heavier punishment* in general, there
can be no justification for its being taken literally and hence laying
down options.—(337-338).


