+++
title = "342 असन्दितानां सन्दाता"

+++
Sometimes horses and other animals, freed from their tethers, are found
to be grazing in fields covered with fodder; if during the time the
master of the Held or the keeper of the cattle happen to be asleep, and
some one else ‘*enchains*’—ties them up,—the presumption is that he is
going to steal the cattle, and hence he deserves to be punished like a
thief. But there is nothing wrong in a case where one ties up an animal
that may have strayed either from the owner’s house or from the. herd,
with a view to keeping it from harm.

The same penalty applies to one who puts a rope round the neck of the
cow; also to one who ‘*sets free*’ those that are ‘*enchained*’—tied up
with chains in the feet.

Similarly one who ‘*takes away slaves*’—those engaged to serve in return
for maintenance,—by enticing them with such words as—‘I shall pay yon
more, why do you stick to this man?’

For the enticing away of persons of noble families, the ‘death-penalty’
has been laid down above under 323, and the present verso lays down that
for enticing slaves and similar persons; and just as in the former case
what is meant is that persons belonging to noble families should not be
enticed away, nor forcibly carried away by stealth,—so in the present
case also.

‘*Who takes away horses and chariots*’;—Verse 324 has referred to horses
belonging to the king, the present refers to those belonging to the
people. In the former case the punishment depends upon the Rājā’s wish,
but in the present case ‘immolation’ is strictly laid down.

Though there are several forms of punishment for thieves, yet
‘immolation’ is what should be taken to be meant here, on the strength
of what is laid down in other Smṛti texts, such as—‘Those who entice
away prisoners, horses and elephants and those who attach people by
force should be impaled.’ In the present case however the general law
relating to thieves—that of cutting off the limb whereby he does the
act—may be applied.

Others take this verse to refer to ‘chariots with horses yoked to them,’
which includes the *bullock-cart* and the rest also.

Under this explanation, the exact punishment for the stealing of *horses
only*, or *chariots only*, would have to be found out; specially as in
other *smṛti* -texts, ‘immolation’ has been prescribed for the stealing
of *horses only*. It may be that the same penalty may apply also to the
case of stealing *horses along with chariots*.

According to those who explain the ‘*haraṇa*,’ ‘*taking away*,’ of the
text as *enticing away with inducements*, the term ‘*chariot*’ has to be
taken as standing for the *chariot-maker*; and this would include all
kinds of mechanics. So that for enticing away a mechanic, the penalty
would be the same as that in the case of the thief. Horses also are
‘enticed away with inducements’ by having a mare placed before
them.—(342)


