+++
title = "344 ऐन्द्रं स्थानम्"

+++
In the terra ‘*sāhasikaḥ*,’ ‘*desperado*,’ ‘desperation’ means
*violence*; hence the ‘desperado’ is one who commits violence; *i.e*,
the man who, not minding either the physical or spiritual effects of his
acts, is prompted by the sheer spirit of violence, and openly engages
himself in causing suffering to others by such acts as theft, hurt,
adultery and so forth. This is what has been already [referred to under
332].

This ‘violence’ is not anything different from *theft* and the rest;
these same acts are called ‘violent crimes’ when they are done with a
certain amount of daring. Such acts as setting fire, tearing clothes and
the like, are also ‘acts of violence,’ since they involve the
destruction of property.

The punishment of such a person the king ‘*shall not ignore*,’—should
not delay,—‘*even for a single moment*,’ *i.e*., he should be punished
the moment he is caught.

‘*Indra’s place*,’—the place that belongs to Indra, *i.e*., Heaven;—‘*he
who seeks to obtain*’ that; or he who desires his own kingly position to
be ‘*aindra*,’ like that of Indra, in point of stability.

If the king punishes those that deserve to be punished,—exercising both
rigour and mercy—his people become attached to him,—‘as the rivers to
the ocean,’ as described above.

‘*Imperishable and eternal fame*’;—we have two qualifying epithets,
because we have two nouns to qualify—‘*eternal place*,’ and
‘*imperishable fame*.’ Or both the epithets may he taken as qualifying
‘fame’;—‘*perishing*’ denoting *lessening of quantity*, and
‘*non-eternality*,’ *absolute destruction*. And both these qualities
belong to the ‘fame’; it never wanes, and it never dies.

This is a valedictory description of things as they happen.—(344)


