+++
title = "349 आत्मनश् च"

+++
**(verses 8.348-349)**

From what has been said above ([in
4.36](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc200140.html))
regarding the carrying of ‘a bamboo-stick’ the carrying of weapon being
permitted to a Vedic-scholar, it is just possible that when possessed of
much physical strength, if he were to take up arms, he would be regarded
as a desperado; hence for fear of his becoming a criminal, it would seem
that the carrying of weapons is forbidden to him; it is in view of this
idea that the present text sanctions the taking up or arms under certain
circumstances—‘*Twice-born persons shall carry arms*.’

This sentence ends here (as a general permission); the rest (of the two
verses) is to be taken along with —‘*if one strikes in the cause of
right*, etc., etc.’ Thus there are two distinct sentences here.

Some people hold that arms are to be taken up only under the
circumstances described hero (and hence they take the whole of the two
verses as a single sentence). But according to this view, what would he
the condition of the man who would be unexpectedly attacked by a
desperado? Certainly desperados would not wait for him to take up arms.

Another interpretation possible is that—“when religion is interfered
with, when there is confusion caused by exigencies of time, *i.e*., when
things have become unsettled on the death of a king—one may take up
arms; but at other tiroes the necessary protection would be afforded by
the king himself.”

But in reality the king cannot spread out his hands and reach every
individual person in the kingdom. There are some desperados who attack
even the boldest, and the most trusted officers of the king; but they
fear persons carrying arms.

For these reasons it is right that one should carry arms at all times.

The question arising—are arms to be carried only for the purpose of
striking fear in the minds of people?—the answer is ‘no,’—‘*if one
strikes in the cause of right, he does not incur sin*’;—*i.e*., what is
permitted extends up to *striking*.

What Āpastamba (1.10.6) has declared—‘The Brāhmaṇa shall not take up a
weapon even for the purpose of testing it’—prohibits the *raising* of
weapons, when none of the mentioned occasions is present, and not the
*carrying* of them; because weapons are unsheathed, when they are
tested.

‘*When religion is interfered with*,’— when the performance of
sacrifices and other religious rites is obstructed by some men.

‘*When there is confusion among the castes*’—absence of all restraint,
admixture of castes, and so forth.

‘*Caused by the exigencies of time*,’—such as the death of the king, and
such other calamities. On all these occasions one shall carry arms fur
the protection of his properly and family.

Others hold that on the occasions stated, arms may be carried for the
sake of other people also;—says Gautama (21.19)—‘Also when some one is
striking a weaker man, if he is able to rescue him.’

Interference with religious rites, and confusion of castes having been
already mentioned as occasions for taking up arms, the author proceeds
to mention other occasions also—‘*In his own defence*’—*i.e*., for
defending his own body, wife, children and property ,—*against all kinds
of danger*—this is what is signified by the preposition ‘*pari*’ in the
term ‘*paritrāṇe*’;—‘if one *strikes, he incurs no sin*.’

‘*In cases of hindrance of sacrificial fees*’—when other people are
taking away the sacrificial fee set up in connection with a
performance,—then one must fight, on that account.

Others construe the phrase to mean ‘when there is a strife for
sacrificial fees’;—*i.e*., if some trouble arises over them.

‘*In the case of outrage upon*’—insult, ill-treatment of,—‘*women and
Brāhmaṇas*,’—where modest women are being forcibly outraged, or killed;
or where a Brāhmaṇa is being killed by some people,—‘*if one strikes*’
with the sword or some such weapon, ‘*he incurs no sin*.’ That is, this
involves no transgression of the prohibition of causing injury to
others.

If there was no prohibition, one might do as he liked; but when we look
at other injunctions and ponder over the declaration of Gautama—‘One
should take up arms when a weaker person is being struck, if he is able
to rescue him,’—we understand that one must strike, under the
circumstances. But if one fears that he may be struck hack, then he
might ignore (what is happening to others), in accordance with the maxim
that ‘one should guard himself against all dangers.’—(348-349).


