+++
title = "350 गुरुं वा"

+++
The author further points out that in one’s own defence a man should
always fight.

That man is called a ‘*desperado*’ who is intent upon destroying one’s
body, property, wife or children. Such a man one ‘*should strike without
hesitation*.’

The mention of the ‘*preceptor*’ and the rest is purely by way of a
commendatory declamation; the sense being—‘when even such persons
deserve to be struck, what of others?’ As a matter of fact, in the case
of the persons named, there is to be no killing, even though they be
desperados; since from what has been said under the text—‘He shall never
offend the teacher who explained the Veda, etc.’ (4.162)—it is clear
that the striking of the preceptor is forbidden, even if he do harm.

It may be possible to construe the term ‘*gurum*’ with
‘*ālatāyinam*’;—hut in that case the two terms would mean ‘the great
desperado’; so that the striking of desperados who are not ‘great’ would
become precluded;—why?—because there is no other text (that would enjoin
*striking* in their case).

“But there is the next verse—‘there is no sin in killing a desperado,’
which permits the killing of all desperados in general.”

Not so; because we do not find any injunctive word in the next verse,
which, on that account is best taken as a declamatory supplement to the
previous injunction (contained in the present verse).

The revered teachers have declared as follows:—Though, in reality, the
injunction contained in the text is that ‘one should strike the
desperado,’ and all the rest is merely declamatory,—yet it has to be
taken as sanctioning the striking of the preceptor and other persons
mentioned. Because the mere ‘malefactor’ (who is mentioned in 4.162, as
not to be offended) is something quite different from the
‘desperado’;—one who inflicts an ordinary injury, which does not involve
any serious harm to the body, etc., is the ‘malefactor’; while the
‘desperado’ is something totally different;—being described in the
following words.—‘Ho who has lifted the sword, who is going to strike
with poison or Are, who has raised his hands for the purpose of
pronouncing a curse, who is going to kill by means of magic spells, who
backbites against one to the king, who violates one’s wife, who is ever
intent upon finding fault with one,—all these should be regarded as
*desperados*?

Some people hold that—“from the use of the word ‘*approaching*’ in the
text it would seem that the person who is rushing forward with uplifted
sword, with a view to strike him, or one who is *going to* take away his
wife, should be struck;—but when the injury has *been done*, he should
ignore it.”

But this is not right; since in the next verse we find the phrase
‘*openly or secretly*,’ from which it is clear that the man who *has
done* the harm, and he who is *going to do it*, both stand on the same
footing. Hence the term ‘*approaching*’ must be taken as purely
descriptive; whether he ‘approaches’ *for doing harm*, or *after having
done harm*,—he is to be struck, because he is a ‘*desperado*; for the
mere fact of his *having done* the act does not deprive him of the
character of a ‘desperado.’ Further, the present text does not sanction
the *striking* in one’s own defence only (in which case alone the
above-mentioned meaning of the epithet would be applicable); since that
has been already provided for in the foregoing verse.—(350)


