+++
title = "356 परस्त्रियं यो"

+++
Though ‘the wife of another man’ has been already mentioned as forming
the subject-matter of this suction, the verse contains the term
‘*another’s woman*,’ with a view to indicate that the prohibition does
not apply to one’s own mother or sister or preceptor’s wife or other
relations; for though these also are included within the category of
‘the wife of another person,’ yet they are not called ‘another’s woman.’

‘*Tīrtha*,’ ‘watering place,’ is that place where people go for the
purpose of fetching water from rivers, tanks and other reservoirs. Such
a place is generally deserted; as none except one desiring water goes
near the place; and as a rule it is places like this that are appointed
rendezvous for lovers’ meetings,—the understanding being ‘come to such
and such a place, where I shall come without being suspected of anything
wrong; as people will think that I have been waiting here for getting
water or for the purpose of performing my ablutions, etc., while if I
were to go to another place, people would suspect why I was waiting
there.’ It is for this reason that conversation at watering-places has
been forbidden.

‘*In a wilderness*’—a deserted spot outside the village; or one that is
surrounded by hedges, thickets, trees and creepers.

‘*Forest*’—cluster of trees.

‘*Confluence of rivers*’—the place where they meet. This also is a place
that is generally appointed rendezvous for lovers.

‘*He incurs the guilt of adultery*’;—‘adultery’ consists in *making love
to other people’s wives*.

*For* this reason, the punishment in this case shall be the same as in
that of ‘adultery.’ This is what is meant.

This prohibition is applicable also to one who has not been previously
accused, as also to one who converses on business.

What Āpastamba has declared that—‘One should not pass over *a woman
without accosting her*,’— refers to places where other people are
present; and to one of open accosting in the proper form,—such as ‘O
sister, I salute thee’ and what is meant is that such salutation should
be offered without delay.—(356)


