+++
title = "359 अब्राह्मणः सङ्ग्रहणे"

+++
The nature of ‘adultery’ has been defined. Penalties for it are now laid
down.

‘*A non-Brāhamaṇa*’—the *Kṣatriya* and other castes.

‘*In cases of adultery*’—when adultery has been committed. ‘*Of* *all
four castes*’—irrespectively of the high or low caste of the woman
concerned.

‘*Penalty of death*’—the punishment consisting in striking till death is
brought about.

“How is it that the same penalty applies to the case of adultery with a
*Brāhmaṇa* as well as a *Śūdra* woman?”

The text adds the next sentence by way of answer to this question—‘*For
the wives of all castes are the most deserving of protection*.’
Whosoever’s wife she may be, she needs to be guarded much more carefully
than one’s body and property. Since the ‘admixture of castes’ is the
same in both cases, the family of the *Śūdra* is ruined by it, just as
much as that of the Brāhmaṇa.

What is meant by the question is this—“what is found here is a mere
assertion; some reason for this should be explained; now what is this
reason?”

In answer to this the ancients have offered the following
explanation:—The penalty here prescribed is not meant to apply to all
forms of ‘adultery,’ but only to that which consists in the chief form
of it, consisting in the actual intercourse, which consists in obtaining
a sensual pleasure by a particular form of contact. How could the same
penalty be inflicted in the case of actual sexual intercourse, as also
in that ‘conversing at a watering-place’ and such places (which also has
been declared to be a form of ‘adultery’)? Hence the conclusion is that
the death-penalty is to be inflicted only in the case of a
‘*non-Brāhmaṇa*’—*i.e*., a *Śūdra*—committing adultery with a woman of
the twice-born castes,—and not in the case of any other person. For it
cannot be right to make equal things that are *not* equal. Hence in the
case of the forms of ‘adultery’ described above, the exact penalty has
to be determined by the circumstances attending each individual case.
For instance, if in a certain case it be found for certain that the
‘offering of help’ and other approaches were made solely with a view to
actual sexual intercourse, the right penalty would be the extreme one of
death; as the case would not stand upon a different footing; as in both
cases the real motive is found to be the same.

It has teen asked—“if the extreme penalty is to be inflicted in the
ordinary forms of ‘adultery,’ what would it be in the case of real
‘adultery’?”

But ‘real adultery’ is not something different. The denotation of the
term is not to be fixed by ordinary parlance; hence it cannot be right
to argue that the extreme penalty is to be inflicted in a case where
there is an act which your august self is pleased to call ‘real
adultery.’

“Adultery with women has been forbidden; hence the question as to how
the same punishment is to be meted out in all cases of it should he
addressed to the scriptures.”

But there is similar prohibition regarding the ‘offering of help’ and
such other acts also.

“Well, in that case, it would follow that in all cases the same
expiatory rite would have to be performed.”

Why should this be regarded as an undesirable contingency? The
contingency would certainly arise if the act concerned were spoken of as
‘adultery.’ Though in reality the term is applied only to a case where
there has been emission of semen, yet punishments are meant to be
deterrent, by reason of their causing pain; hence in the case of such
acts as the ‘offering of help’ and the rest, penalty equal to that in
the case of actual intercourse has to be inflicted, on the ground that
if such acts as ‘conversation’ and the rest were associated with small
punishments, then men would he tempted to repeat them; and by frequent
conversations with women, their passion would become whetted; so that
falling a prey to the arrows of Cupid, they would not mind the small
punishments inflicted by the king, and would commit the act even at the
risk of their lives. On the other hand, if at the very first approach,
the man is met by a severely deterrent punishment, the little acts would
not be repeated, and the real act might he averted.

It is for this reason that it has been considered right to inflict a
severe punishment upon those who may just begin to make approaches to
the wives of other men.

So far as the present verse is concerned, we find the term ‘*prāṇānta*,’
‘*ending* in death,’—which shows that the *beginning* of the penalty
would be something else; for unless a thing has a *beginning*, it can
have no *end*. The term ‘*ending in death*’ means *that of which death
is the end*; *i.e*., the punishment should go on being inflicted until
death comes about. Thus it is that all such punishments as ‘confiscation
of property,’ ‘cutting off of limbs’ and so forth become included.

Each of these has been found in other cases to constitute a ‘punishment’
by itself. So that, when a number of punishments have been prescribed,
since all these cannot be inflicted for any single crime, the right
conclusion is that in the case of a non-Brāhmaṇa committing adultery
with a twice-born woman, the highest of those punishments shall be
inflicted, and the man shall be put to death. But even in the case of
women of lower castes, the death-penalty shall be inflicted in the case
of the man committing adultery with an unwilling family-woman whose
husband is alive.—(359)


