+++
title = "363 किञ् चिद्"

+++
‘*Secretly*’—not in public, but in a solitary spot;—he who carries on
conversation with the women of dancers and singers,—should be fined
‘*something*’—*i.e*., some small amount of gold—the thirtieth part of a
‘*suvarṇa*’ or some such thing; the exact amount being determined in
conformity with the caste of the party concerned and the circumstances
attending each case. The reason why some punishment is necessary lies in
the fact that the women concerned are not entirely public women,—it is
with the permission of their husbands that they admit paramours. It is
on account of this fact of their not being independent that they should
be approached, not directly, but through a go-between; for the purpose
of ascertaining if the mesalliance has the husband’s sanction.

Holding conversation with them *openly* however,—when for instance, they
are dancing and singing, and they are questioned regarding the tune or
the timing and other details of the song,—this is not forbidden.

‘*Maidservant*’ is *slave-girl*; acquired by any one of the seven
methods of acquiring slaves.

‘*Devoted to one master*,’—*i.e*., those that are the kept mistresses of
any one man.

In the case of these last there is some ground for other kinds of
punishment also.

“Is the term ‘maidservant’ meant to be a relative term,—meaning the
slave owned by a certain master P Or does it denote simply a *servant*,
just like such terms as ‘cook’ and the like?”

In the present context the term is used in the former sense The meaning
being that when some one has intercourse with a slave girl or a
prostitute kept by another man,—such woman is punished, just as a king’s
slave would be. If however the girl has not been ‘kept’ by any one, then
there is no wrong done. As the present text prescribes the punishment to
be inflicted for ‘adultery’ with a woman ‘kept’ by another man.

We shall explain this in greater detail under the section on division of
property.

‘*Female ascetics*,’—those having no guardian to look after them,
*e.g*., *Śilamitrā* and so forth (?) These women hide their lascivious
tendencies under the cloak of asceticism.—(363)


