+++
title = "366 उत्तमां सेवमानस्"

+++
It has been said that in the case of violating an unwilling maiden, all
men, be they superior or inferior, should suiter death, with the sole
exception of the *Brāhmaṇa*; and the present verse, they say, lays down
the law relating to the violating of a willing maiden.

‘*Superior*,’—in beauty, youth, caste and other points.

‘*Inferior*’—the lowest.

The man is not to be killed if there is any equality between the
parties.

If a man approaches a willing maiden who is equal to him in status,—he
shall pay to her father the nuptial fee, as is done in the case of the
‘*Asura*’ form of marriage. But if the father does not desire to receive
the fee, that amount shall be paid as fine to the king.

“In as much as this would he a case of ‘*Gāndharva*’ marriage—marriage
by mutual consent,—it cannot be right to inflict any punishment.”

Who has said that there is to be no punishment in the case of marriage
by mutual consent? In fact such an act would not be one befitting a
chaste woman; nor would it he regarded as ‘marriage,’ for the simple
reason that it would not have a sacramental character. As for the
declaration in the Mahābhārata, in connection with Śakuntalā, to the
effect that ‘the *Gāndharva* is a form of marriage, without fire and
without mantras,’—this was an assertion made by Duṣyanta while he was
suffering from the pangs of love. Further, mere ‘willing intercourse’
does not constitute ‘marriage.’ Marriage has been classified under eight
heads on the basis of different methods used for taking a wife; and it
does not mean that there are eight kinds of marriage. So that (in the
*Gāndharva* marriage also), the due selection of the bridegroom (even
though he has been already chosen by the bride) and the subsequent rites
have got to be performed.

Or, the ‘*Gāndharva*’ may be accepted as a ‘marriage’ only in the case
of a maiden after puberty; and before that, the man is to pay the
nuptial fee or a fine.

The question arises—what is to be done with the maiden?

The answer is that she shall be given to that same man. But if she has
ceased to love him, she may be given to another man. But in either case
the ‘nuptial fee’ has got to be paid, by way of compensation for the
single act of intercourse.

If the man has ceased to love the girl, he shall be forced to accept
her.—(366)


