+++
title = "373 संवत्सराभिशस्तस्य दुष्टस्य"

+++
‘*Convicted*’—charged of the crime; when a man has committed adultery
with a woman and has been punished, he is said to be ‘*convicted*.’

If such a man, within a year, commits adultery with the same woman, then
the man being thus convicted and accused again, the fine shall be
double.

Another reading is ‘*saṃvatsarābhiśastasya*’ in the compounded form. In
this case also the passage may be construed somehow.

‘“*The same also in the case of intercourse with a* “*vrātyā*,”’—that
is, when accused again.

Such cannot be the meaning of the verse, we say. In the case of the
intercourse in question, there are hound to be various grades of
punishment, in the shape of the ‘lowest,’ the ‘middle’ and the ‘highest’
amercement. So that it is not clear the ‘double’ of which one is meant.

What therefore is meant by ‘the same’ is that the line in the case of
intercourse with the ‘*vrātyā*’ is to be ‘the same’ as that in that of
the ‘*caṇḍālī*’; and for the latter case, the tine of ‘one thousand’ has
been prescribed under 385, below.

‘*Vrātyā*.’—‘*Vrāta*’ means *host, crowd*; so that the ‘*vrātyā*’ would
be *one who has intercourse with a large number of men*; the term being
explained etymologically as ‘*vrātena charati*’; or it may be explained
as ‘*vrātam arhati*,’ the *ya* in the middle coming in in accordance
with Pāṇini, 5.1.66. Who would be the woman that would be ‘*vrātyā*’ in
this latter sense? The unchaste woman who has intercourse with several
men; for it is only she that can be said to be *fit for a host*,’
(‘*vrātam arhati*’).

Or, the term ‘*vrātyā*’ may stand for the village slave-girl, who has
several masters.

Some people explain ‘*vrātyā*’ as meaning *unmarried*.

But according to this view the term would not be held to be used in its
primary sense. For the writers on *Smṛti* have used the term in the
sense of ‘those who have fallen off from the Sāvitrī’; and this cannot
he applicable to women.

“But for the woman marriage has been declared to be the substitute for
*upanayana* (initiation into Sāvitrī). So that she who has not been
married, would be a ‘*vrātyā*.’”

But in that case the term would be used in the figurative, not the
primary, sense. Even though the term ‘*upanayana*’ has been used in the
sense of *marriage*, which is *not-upanayana*, yet when it is declared
that ‘the man who is devoid of the *upanayana* is called a *vrātya*,’ it
is never understood to mean that the man *devoid of marriage* is meant.
Just as when it is said that ‘this place is without a lion,’ it is never
understood to mean that ‘the place is without the boy,’—eveu though the
term ‘lion’ may have been figuratively used for the ‘boy.’

“In the latter case there is possibility of the primary moaning of the
term ‘lion’ being applicable, but in the case in question, there is no
such for the term ‘*upanayana*.’”

Figurative use does not depend entirely upon the impossibility of the
primary meaning; it stands in need of other attendant circumstances
also.

Then again, there is no doubt that the term ‘upana yana’ in the sense of
*marriage* can be only figurative; but what reason can there be for
regarding the term ‘*vrātyā*’ also (in the present text) as figurative?
Even though it be figurative, it will he difficult to explain this as
being based upon the fact of there being no marriage.

Further, it may be supposed that the woman born of a *vrātya*,’ is also
a *vrātyā* on the analogy of the bird born of a *crow* being a *crow*,
and that born of the *kite* being a kite. And the term ‘*vrātyā*’ would
he applicable to the child by its relationship to the ‘*vrātyā*’ (the
nominal affix denoting this relationship).

“But the wife of the *vrātya* man cannot be called a ‘*vrātyā*,’ even
though she bear a *relationship* to him.”

But in the case cited the difficulty would be due to the case coming
under Pāṇini’s Sūtra 4.1.18 (by which the feminine form would be
‘*vrātyī*’). The case of ‘the child born of the Vrātyā woman’ however
does not come under this *Sūtra*.

Thus then, if the term ‘*vrātyā*’ is to be taken in a figurative sense,
it is to be understood to stand for ‘the woman born of a *vrātyā*
woman.’ If on the other hand, the term is used in its primary sense,
then it must mean ‘*she who is fit for a vrāta* or crowd,’—The
‘*unmarried woman*’ on the other hand does not come in either as the
primary or the figurative meaning. Further, there is no time fixed for
the marriage of women, by transgressing which they would become *vrātyā*
(in the sense in which the man transgressing the time-limit for
*Upanayana* becomes known as *vrātya*). As for the rule that girls
should be married *before puberty*,—its transgression also is permitted
by the sanctioning of the custom of ‘*Svayaṃvara*,’ ‘self-choice,’ which
can be done only when a woman is of a sufficiently advanced age, and
hence has attained puberty. And further, if no girl were to be married
after puberty, several girls would have to remain in their father’s
house till death.—(373).


