+++
title = "388 ऋत्विजं यस्"

+++
‘*Officiating priest*’—a person who performs the several acts in
connection with ‘sacrificial performances’; *e.g*., the *Ṛtvik*, the
*Hotṛ*, the *Udgātṛ* and so forth.

Though the name ‘officiating priest’ becomes applicable to the man only
after his *appointment*, and continues so till the completion of the
rites, yet the law that is laid down here pertains to the forsaking done
before the actual *appointment*, and not to that during the performance
of the rites that have commenced. And the titles are applied on the
ground of past events; that is to say, it is only one who has had
previous experience; as a priest who has the chance of being chosen
again. In fact the title is applied, not only on the basis of previous
experience, but also upon hereditary qualifications; as says Nārada—‘the
man employed previously is self-chosen’; and further, this applies not
only to the experience of a single generation, but to the
family-traditions of several generations; as has been described in
detail in the *Mahābhārata* in the sections dealing with Saṃvarta and
Marutta.

The upshot thus is that those persons should be chosen as officiating
priests who belong to the same family members whereof have been chosen
in the past by the forefathers of the selector.

This same is applicable to the case of the ‘sacrifices’ also; the
priests also should hare recourse to the same sacrifices with whose
forefathers their forefathers may hare had dealings in the past.

‘*Officiating priest*’—the man who has performed the priestly duties, or
one who belongs to the family of such a person.

If a man going to perform a sacrifice does not appoint such a priest,
but ask some one else.

‘*Capable of doing the work*’—of sacrificing; *i.e*., conversant with
the entire procedure.

‘*Free from disqualifications*’—*i.e*., not haring any such defect as a
defective limb, or being accused of a serious crime and so forth.

If such a qualified priest, on being requested to officiate, refuses to
do so, and does not accept the priesthood offered;—when the sacrificer
is free from the said disqualifications and is fully learned.

In the case of both these forsakings, there shall be a fine of one
hundred. If the priest forsakes the sacrificer he should be made to pay
a hundred, and so also the sacrifices if he forsakes the priest.

This rule is applicable, not only to the case of the sacrificer and the
officiating priest, but also to that of the Preceptor and the Pupil. As
says Gautama (21.12-13)—‘The Priest and the Preceptor are to be forsaken
only if they are deficient in learning, or happen to serve an outcast;
by forsaking them otherwise one becomes an outcast.’

Some people hold that this law is applicable also to the case of the
giver and the recipient.—(388)


