+++
title = "406 दीर्घाध्वनि यथादेशम्"

+++
The toll mentioned in the foregoing verses is to be paid for the
crossing of rivers; what is now declared relates to the passage by boat
from one village to another.

‘*For a long passage*’—*i.e*., in a journey that is measured by miles.

‘*In proportion to the place*’—*i.e*., according to the freight-rates
that may have been fixed by the boatmen of the place concerned.

‘*In proportion to the time*,’—the fare payable during the rains, or
where there is plenty of water, shall he different from that payable in
a river where there is very little water; in the latter case there is
much time taken in going from one village to another, and it involves
more labour on the part of the boatmen,—hence the fare in this case
would he heavier.

The term ‘*tara*,’ which literally means *crossing*, which is the effect
of the *fare* that is paid, has been used here for this latter. The
sense is that the amount of fare payable goes on increasing in
proportion to the distance traversed.

‘*This should be understood to be the rule regarding the banks of
rivers*.’

‘*In regard to the sea, there is no settled rule*’—regarding fares.
Since it cannot be ascertained how many miles the boat has been carried,
according to which the distance and the fare could be computed. In the
case of rivers and lakes, it can be ascertained whether the distance
traversed is one *Yojana* (8 miles) or two; because the villages serve
as the measuring points; so that the fare paid for a journey of two
would ho double of that paid for that of one *Yojana*. In the sea, on
the other hand, the boat can be taken with great difficulty, and
distances also cannot he measured; it is for this reason that it has
been declared that ‘*as regards the sea there is no settled
rule*.’—(406)


