+++
title = "410 वाणिज्यङ् कारयेद्"

+++
Some people explain this text as follows:—“The *Vaiśya* and *Śūdra*
should he made to do the work here mentioned, even though they be
unwilling to do so; since such is their duty. Even though the law is
laid down for a visible purpose, yet from the very nature of the
restrictive injunction, it has to be regarded as indicating a
transcendental result also. Such being the sense of the text, it comes
to this that the Brāhmaṇa also should he forced to accept gifts. If it
be held that such acceptance has heen held, in certain cases, to be
improper, then the same may be said regarding the case in question
also.”

This however is not right. What the injunction contained in the verse
does is to lay down the methods to be adopted by certain men *if they
are desirous of acquiring wealth*; and it does not mean that they must
act as here laid down. man’s activity is not always determined by
injunctions; *i.e*., there is no need for an injunction in a case where
there is some motive already present. It is only in the *restriction*
that lies the use of the injunction; and the restriction in the present
case is that it is *the Vaiśya only* who should be made to carry on
trade; so that if any other man do that work, except in times of
distress, he should be punished by the king. Similarly it is the
*Brāhmaṇa only* who should accept gifts; but if he happens to be
contented, he may desist from receiving gifts, though quite capable of
receiving them. As regards the statement in verse 412 below, that is
purely declamatory. Similarly it is the *Śūdra only* who should be made
to perform service; and so on, the sense of the restriction may easily
he explained—(410)


