+++
title = "415 ध्वजाहृतो भक्तदासो"

+++
The term ‘*Dhvajā*’ ‘*banner*’ stands for the *chariot*;

hence ‘*Dhvajinī*’ means the *army*; ho who is captured ‘*under the
banner*’ is the captive of war, who is made a slave.

“What is stated here,—does it refer to the *Kṣatriya*,—the meaning being
that the Kṣatriya made captive in war becomes a slave?”

Not so, we reply; since it is the *Śūdra* that forms the subject-matter
of the context; as is clear from the preceding statement—‘it is for the
purpose of servitude that he has been created.’ What the text refers to
is the case where the owner of the slave having been defeated in battle,
the slave is brought over and enslaved by the captor.

“as a matter of fact, servitude has been declared to be for *all
Śūdras*—when for instance it was asserted that servitude is ‘innate in
him.’”

It is not so; for in that case there would be a great confusion; as it
would not be ascertained to whom a certain slave belongs; since all the
three higher castes would be their masters, to be served by them. Hence
there would be no restriction. Then again, all that has been asserted
before (regarding servitude being ‘innate’ in the *Śūdra* and all that)
is not of the nature of an injunction. Further, there is the declaration
that ‘among the castes each of the following shall serve the preceding’
(Gautama, 10.66),—by which the *Kṣatriya* and the *Vaiṣhya* also would
have to be regarded as slaves.

All this however is not right. ‘Serving’ is one thing and ‘slavery’ is
another. Slavery consists in doing servile work, and in not objecting to
going anywhere he may be sent to; while ‘service’ may consist in
shampooing the body, guarding the family or property and so forth. All
this has been dealt with in detail by Nārada.

‘*Slave on food*’—he who has accepted slavery for obtaining food.

‘*Born in the house*’—*i.e*., born of a slave-girl.

‘*Bought*’—from the former master, for a price.

‘*Presented*’—given to one, either through love, or for the purpose of
acquiring spiritual merit.

‘*Hereditary*’—who has belonged to the family through a line of
ancestors.

“What is the difference between this last and the slave *born in the
house*?”

The latter is one born of a slave-girl that may have been acquired by
the master himself, while the other is hereditary.

‘*Enslaved for punishment*’—one who, being incapable of paying the
king’s fines, is made a slave.

In fact, according to some people, such slaves are possible for the
other castes also, in view of what has been said regarding the propriety
of repaying a debt even by manual labour.

But this is not right; as ‘slavery’ is one thing and ‘doing manual work’
is something totally different. Nor is the case cited a case of
‘punishment,’ whereby it could be included under the present head. Then
again, when it is said that debts may be repaid ‘by manual work also,’
it does not necessarily mean ‘slavery,’ though this also may be one kind
of ‘work.’

“When the *Śūdra* works as a slave entirely through considerations of
his duty, why should there be only *seven* kinds of slaves?”

There is no force in this objection. Because in his case ‘slavery’ is
not innate in him; it is purely voluntary wish him; he having recourse
to it only with a view to acquiring merit. And further, such a slave
cannot be given away or pledged;—as the bought and house-born slaves
can. In fact the *Śūdra* in question is guided by what has been declared
(under 10.128) regarding the Śūdra ‘imitating the behaviour of the
virtuous, etc., etc.’; and by this it is clearly implied that slavery is
not inherent in him; he takes to it only with a view to a definite
result. Hence there is real ‘slavery’ only when it is involuntary. So
that if a *Śūdra* has property of his own and lives upon it, not
supporting himself by depending upon the Brāhmaṇa and others, he does
nothing wrong.—(415)


