+++
title = "416 भार्या पुत्रश्"

+++
These three are without property, even though they may acquire property.
Property can belong to one *who has possession*; while whatever property
the said persons acquire is in the possession of him to whom they
themselves belong; so that the property of the wife belongs to the
husband, that of the son to the father and that of the slave to the
master.

“If these persons have no property, how can they be entitled to the
performance of any rites? So that it would not be right to assert
that—‘if two sons should have kindled the consecrated fire, they should
offer the oblations to those for whom the father offers them.’ Then
again, it is necessary for the husband and wife to perform religious
rites jointly, the husband being exhorted not to ignore the wife in
matters relating to religious acts, pleasure and wealth? If however the
wife has no property, what would be her *ignoring* in regard to wealth?
Further, the *Śūdra* also has got to make certain offerings of cooked
food; and this also would be incompatible with the fact of his having no
property. There would be no such incompatibility if the injunction
regarding these offerings were taken as referring to such *Śūdras* as
are free (and hence possess property). But as a matter of fact, *slaves*
also have proprietary rights over their property, whioh is, on that
account, called their *own property*. For these reasons it is wrong to
say that ‘*what they acquire is the property of him to whom they
belong*.’ This is exactly like the assertion ‘she whose son I am is not
my mother.’ Further, if women had no proprietary right, there would be
no sense in such śruti-declarations as—‘the wife should obey,’ ‘the wife
should follow in the footsteps of her marrier’ and so forth.”

Our answer to the above is, as follows:—What is meant by the text is
only that they are *dependent, subservient*; the meaning being that
‘without the husband’s sanction, the wife should not employ her wealth
anywhere she may choose.’ Similarly with the son and the slave.

Others however hold that the ‘wife’ and the ‘son’ have been mentioned
only by way of illustrating the status of the slave; and the latter is
mentioned for the purpose of declaring, in reference to him alone, what
follows in the next verse, which means that in times of distress the
master should feel no hesitation in taking what belongs to the slave; as
in reality it is the master’s own property.—(416)


