+++
title = "002 न वै"

+++
**(verses 11.1-2)**

‘*Gurvartham*’.—‘For the purpose of maintaining his Teacher’
(Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘in order to procure the fee
for his Teacher’ (Nārāyaṇa).

These verses are quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 468), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Sāntānika*,’ ‘for the sake of
offspring’;—‘*Sarvavedasa*’, ‘one who has given away all his
belongings’;—‘*upatāpī*’, one who is ill;—this is meant to permit only
that much of wandering on the road and other deviations without which
alms cannot be obtained.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 77);—and in *Parā* *śaramādhava* (Ācāra
p. 429), which adds the following notes:—‘*Sāntānika*,’ one who seeks
wealth for the purpose of marrying with a view to obtaining
children;—‘*Sarvavedasa*,’ one who has been reduced to penury on having
performed the sacrifice at which all his belongings have been given away
as the sacrificial fee,—‘*pitṛmātrartham*’, one who seeks to serve his
parents,—‘*svādhyāyārthī*,’ who seeks wealth for the keeping up of the
teaching of the Veda,—‘*upotāpī*’, invalid;—the compound
‘*svādhyāyārthyupatāpi*’ is to be expounded as ‘the *upatāpi*, invalid,
as along with the *svādhyāyārthi*’, *i.e*., both of these.

It is quoted in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha p. 354, and Dāna p. 30), which
explains ‘*sāntānikān*’ as ‘those who seek to marry for the purpose of
begetting offspring’,—‘*adhvaga*’ as ‘one who has started on a
pilgrimage’,—‘*sārvavedasa*,’ (which is its reading for ‘*sarvavedasa*’)
as ‘one who is performing sacrifice at which one’s entire property is
given away as the sacrificial fee,’—and ‘*upatāpi*’ as an ‘invalid.’


