+++
title = "055 अनृतञ् च"

+++
‘*Guroścālīkanirbandhaḥ*.’—‘Wrongfully going to law against the teacher’
(Medhātithi), or ‘falsely accusing the teacher’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja
and Kullūka);—‘Repeatedly doing what is disagreeable to the teacher’
(Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p, 419), as
enumerating offences on the same footing as Brāhmaṇa-slaughter;—in
*Aparārka* (p. 1047), which adds the following notes:—On the occasion of
the examination of the disputed superiority of qualifications of two
rivals, if the Judge pronounces a false judgment, this act is as sinful
as the killing of a Brāhmaṇa; ‘*alīkanirbandha*’ is false
accusation;—and in *Madanapārijātā* (p. 807), which adds the explanation
that ‘when a man without knowing the our Vedas, represents himself to
the king as knowing them,—and some one is asked to examine the validity
of the claim—if this latter should make a false report, the sin incurred
by him is equal to that involved in Brāhmaṇa-slaughter’.

It is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 177), which adds the following
notes—‘*Anṛtañca samutkarṣe*’ means the misrepresentation of oneself as
possessing qualities which are not really possessed, *e.g*., when a
Śūdra says ‘I am a Brāhmaṇa’ and wears the sacred thread,—or
misrepresentation regarding the qualifications of another person *e.g*.,
if one were to say of a learned Brāhmaṇa that he knows nothing,—this is
equal to ‘Brāhmaṇa-murder’,—*i.e*. involves the twelve-year
penance;—this refers to cases of *intentional* and *repeated*
acts,—‘*paiśuna*’ is backbiting to the king, and ‘*guroḥ* &c.’ is false
accusation of one’s father.


