+++
title = "056 ब्रह्मोज्झता वेदनिन्दा"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (3.231), to the effect that though
the offences here enumerated have been placed by Yājñavalkya in the same
category as ‘Brāhmaṇa-slaughter’, while Manu classes them with
‘wine-drinking’,—yet all that this implies is that there are alternative
expiatory rites.

It, is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 1047), as placing on the same footing as
‘wine-drinking’, such offences as ‘forgetting’ and ‘reviling’ the Veda
and the killing of a friend; and the meaning of this is that there are
alternative expiatory rites;—it explains ‘*anādyam*’ as uneatable on
account of bad smell and the like.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta p. 293) in support of the
view that these offences are ‘*anupātakas*’ ‘ancillary sins’, as
distinguished from ‘*upapātakas*’ ‘minor sins’.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijata* (p. 807), which makes the same remark
as *Mitākṣarā*;—and again on p. 825, where the following notes are
added:—According to *Smṛtimañjarī*, ‘*garhita*’ stands for onions and
such other forbidden food, and ‘*anādya*’ for impure food; while
according to *Kalpataru* ‘*garhita*’ stands for such food as, though not
forbidden by the scriptures, is deprecated by the people:—‘*anādyam*’,
garlic and such things;—the eating of these things is equal to
wine-drinking, only when it is done intentionally.

It is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 177), which has the following
notes—‘*Brahmojjhatā*’ means ‘forgetting the Veda through neglect of
proper study,’—‘*Vedanindā*’, passing deprecatory remarks against the
words and contents of the Vedas—‘*Suhṛdvadha*’, murdering of a friend
other than the Brāhmaṇa,—‘*garhītānna*’ is ‘food of the lowest
born’,—‘*garhitādya’, is* forbidden food, *e.g*., mushrooms and so
forth, of which *repeated* eating is meant here. It notes the reading
‘*garhitānādya*’ as adopted by *Kalpataru*, which explains ‘*garhita*’
as ‘what is forbidden by the scriptures’, and ‘*anādya*’ as ‘what is
very much deprecated among the people, such as garlic &c.’


