+++
title = "094 गौडी पैष्टी"

+++
‘*Madhvī*.’—distilled from honey’ (Medhātithi);—‘distilled from Madhūka
flowers’ (Kullūka);—‘distilled either from grapes and from Madhūka
flowers or from honey’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 1044), which adds that the liquor
distilled from grains is here made an example of prohibited drink; which
means that this is the principal kind of liquor, and the other two are
only secondary; it is for this reason that though all the three are
equally forbidden for the Brāhmaṇa, the former alone is forbidden for
the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (3.253), to the effect that liquor distilled
from grains is the principal kind of liquor;—and again, in the sense
that the sin involved in the drinking of liquor distilled from honey and
molasses is as heavy as that in drinking that distilled from grains.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 411), which notes
that the name ‘*Surā*’ is applied primarily to liquor distilled from
grains only, and only indirectly to those distilled from honey and
molasses;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 548);—in *Madanapārijāta* (p.
814), which notes that ‘*dvijottama*’ stands for Brāhmaṇas; hence the
meaning is that all kinds of liquor are forbidden for the Brāhmaṇa from
his very birth;—in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 89) in support of the view
that the name ‘*Surā*’ applies to wines of all the three kinds;—and in
*Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 355) to the effect that the name ‘*Surā*’ applies
directly to these three kinds of wine only, and only figuratively to
other kinds.


