+++
title = "100 गृहीत्वा मुसलम्"

+++
‘*Tapasaiva tu*.’—“Kullūka thinks that it indicates that, while a
Brāhmaṇa must never be slain by the king, other Āryans also may perform
austerities.—According to Rāghavānanda it refers to the optional
recitation of the *Gāyatri* 700,000 times;—according to Nārāyaṇa to
other penances, even such as end in death;—Govindarāja takes it as
referring to those prescribed in the next verse.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 414), which
adds the following notes:—The alternative of ‘killing’ is meant for one
who is a Brāhmaṇa in name only while ‘austerity’ is for one who is
endowed with such qualities as being devoted to sacrifices and so forth.
It goes on to add that the death-penalty is meant for cases of
intentional stealing; *unintentional* stealing of gold being possible in
cases where a man steals a piece of cloth, to which (unknown to him) a
piece of gold may be tied. It adds that the particular ‘austerity’ is,
meant as described by Manu himself in the next verse.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 1079), which adds that the term
‘*vipraḥ*’ does not preclude the other castes; it is emphasised only
with a view to indicate that what is here stated is an exception to the
general prohibition ‘the Brāhmaṇa shall not he killed this general
prohibition is of that act of killing to which one is prompted by mere
passion; in the case in question the killing is done as an act of
justice, and at the request of the culprit himself. In fact the omission
of this act of justice would involve the king in sin.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (3.267), which adds the following note—On
being struck once, if the culprit dies, he becomes absolved from his
sin; but even if he do not die when struck, he becomes absolved from the
sin;—and again, to the effect that, the killing of the Brāhmaṇa under
the said circumstances is permissible;—and in *Prayaścittaviveka* (p.
117).


