+++
title = "108 उपपातकसंयुक्तो गोघ्नो"

+++
**(verses 11.108-116)  
**

These verses are quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 191),
which adds that this refers to the ease of intentionally killing a cow
belonging to a Brāhmaṇa;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 860), which notes that
what is laid down in verses 108 to 113 refers to cases of intentional
killing of a cow belonging to the Kṣatriya, and what is declared in
verses 115 and 116 to cases of killing any cow belonging to a Brāhmaṇa.
It goes on to add the following notes:—Since the text mentions no other
food, the man should live upon fruits and roots only; or the meaning may
be that ‘*anena vidhinā*’ (of verse 115) refers to the two months’
course detailed in the foregoing verses; and the sense is that the man
who is unable to give ten cows with a bull should give away all his
belongings. When however one unintentionally kills a cow, young and
well-fed, belonging to a Brāhmaṇa, he should observe the *three-monthly*
penance prescribed by Aṅgiras.

They are quoted also in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 519);—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p.
358);—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (pp. 196-197), which says that this
refers to the ordinary killing of the cow, and *not* to its killing for
sacrifices;—and adds the following explanation:—He should shave his
head, cover himself with the skin of the cow he has killed, and drink
gruel of barley cooked in cow’s urine’, and thus live in the cow-pen,
for one month, and during the next two months he should fast during the
day and eat a little in the evening,—‘*vīrāsana*’ is sitting without any
support,—‘*abhiśasta*’ attacked,—‘*bhayaih*’ by dangerous
animals,—‘*sarvaprāṇaiḥ*’ (which is its reading for *sarvapāpaiḥ*’), to
the best of his power—‘*gām na kathayet*’, with a view to have her
driven away,—‘*sucaritavrataḥ*’, he who has followed these restrictions
in the right manner,—he should give ten cows along with one bull.

Verse 115 only is quoted in the *Śuddhikaumdī* (p.241).


