+++
title = "180 संवत्सरेण पतति"

+++
“Govindarāja and Nārāyaṇa explain the verse differently:—‘He who
associates with an outcast by sacrificing for him, or by forming a
matrimonial alliance with him, himself becomes an outcast after a year,
but not by using the same carriage or seat, or eating with
him’.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 849), which explains the
meaning as follows:—‘By associating with an outcast on conveyances,
seats and dinners after one year,—but by associating with him in
sacrificing, teaching and the like, he becomes an outcast, not after one
year, but immediately

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 1087), which offers the following
explanation:—By associating in any way with a known outcast, himself
becomes an outcast; that is, becomes like him;—there are some acts in
which associating with the outcast makes one an outcast, irrespective of
all other considerations; and such acts are ‘sacrificing, teaching and
marrying’; each of these acts by itself makes the associator an
outcast;—the acts of going on the same conveyance, sitting together and
eating, on the other hand, do not by themselves make him an outcast;
they do so through other acts.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (8.261), as meaning that only such acts as
those of ‘travelling together and so forth’ make one an outcast by being
continued for one year;—it adds that ‘sitting’ includes ‘sleeping’ also.
It remarks that the passage is to be construed as
follows:—‘*Saṃvatsareṇa patati patitena sahācaran yānāsanāśanāt*’; and
‘*Yājanādhyāpanādyaunāt na tu saṃvatsareṇa patati, kintu sadya eva*’;
and concludes thus—‘By sacrificing and other acts the man becomes an
outcast at once, while by sleeping and other acts he becomes so only by
continuing it for one year’.

It is quoted in *Prāyaścittaviveka*, (pp. 149 and 156), which construes
‘*Yāṇāṣanāśanāt*’ as ‘*Yānasanāśanāt utpannam saṃyogam ācaran*’,—and
adds that these three, when done all together and intentionally, do
degrade the man.


