+++
title = "002 न वै"

+++
**(verses 11.1-3)  
**

*Mahābhārata* (12.165.1-3).—‘One whose property has been stolen, one who
is going to perform a sacrifice, one who has read up to the end of all
the Vedas, one who is seeking wealth for his teacher, or for the
performance of rites to Pitṛs, or for the carrying on of Vedic
study,—such Brāhmaṇas have been regarded as righteous beggars. To such
poor men one should give gifts and also impart learning. In other cases
the sacrificial fee should be paid; and to others, cooked food may he
given outside the altar.’

*Gautama* (5.21-23).—‘Presents of money should be given, outside the
Vedi, to persons begging for their teachers, or in order to defray the
expenses of their wedding, or to procure medicine for the sick, to those
who are going to offer a sacrifice, to those engaged in study, to
travellers, and to those who have performed the Viśvajit sacrifice.
Prepared food should be given to other beggars.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.5.19-20).—‘Presents of money should be given, according
to one’s ability, to good Brāhmaṇas, *Śrotriyas*, and to those who have
gone to the end of the Vedas, when they beg outside the Vedi, for the
sake of their teachers, or for defraying the expenses of their marriage,
or of medicine, or when they are distressed for livelihood, or are
desirous of offering a sacrifice, or engaged in study, or on a journey,
or have performed the *Viśvajit* sacrifice. Cooked food should be given
to other beggars.’

*Āpastamba* (2.10.1-2).—‘The reasons for which begging is permissible
are—tho desire to collect the fee for the teacher, the celebration of
wedding, or of a *Śrauta* sacrifice, the desire to maintain one’s
parents and the impending interruption of ceremonies performed by a
worthy man. The person asked for alms must examine the qualities of the
petitioner and give according to his power.’
