+++
title = "044 अकुर्वन् विहितम्"

+++
**(verses 11.44-47)**

*Mahābhārata* (12-34.2).—(Same as Manu 44)

*Gautama* (19.2-7).—‘A man in this world is polluted by a vile action,
such as sacrificing for men unworthy to offer sacrifices, eating
forbidden food, speaking what should not he spoken, neglecting what is
prescribed and doing what is forbidden. People are in doubt if such a
man shall, or shall not, perform a penance for such a deed. Some declare
that he shall not do it, because the deed must persist. The best opinion
is that he shall perform a penance. For it is declared in the Veda that
one who has performed the penance of *Punastoma* may come back to
partake of the Soma-libations.’

*Baudhāyana* (3.10.2-5).—\[The same as Gautama; but it adds ‘accepting
gifts from those whose gift should not be accepted;’ for ‘eats forbidden
food,’ it has ‘Eats the food of one whose food should not he eaten,’ and
it omits ‘speaking etc.’ and also ‘neglecting what is prescribed.’\]

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.1-2).—‘A penance shall be performed for an offence
committed unintentionally. Some declare that it shall he performed also
for those committed intentionally.’

Do. (22.1-5).—‘Now indeed man in this world speaks an untruth, or
sacrifices for men unworthy to offer a sacrifice, or accepts what should
not be accepted, or eats forbidden food, or does what should not be
done.’ (The rest as in Gautama).

*Yājñavalkya* (3.219-221).—‘A man becomes degraded by omitting to do
what is enjoined, by doing what is condemned, and by not controlling the
senses. Therefore for the purpose of purifying himself, he shall perform
expiatory penances; thus do the people and also his own inner soul
become appeased. By the performance of expiatory penances does that sin
disappear which had been committed unintentionally; if the sin had been
committed intentionally, the performance of the penances only makes the
man fit for being associated with; such being the declaration. Those who
commit sins, and yet do not perform the penances, nor repent their
misdeeds, fall into terrible hells.’

*Chāgaleya* (Aparārka, p. 1039).—‘The expiatory penances are for sins
committed unintentionally; for those committed intentionally, there is
no expiation.’

*Jābāli* (Parāśaramādhava-Prāyaścitta, p. 153).—‘The Brāhmaṇas prescribe
penances for sins committed unintentionally; some people prescribe them
also for those committed intentionally, for twice-born men as well as
for Śūdras.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘When a sin has been committed unintentionally, and only
once, there is expiation prescribed for it by persons versed in the Law.
If the sin is committed a second time, the penance shall he the double
of the former; if it is repeated for the third time, it shall he the
three-fold *Kṛcchra*; and for the fourth repetition, there is no
expiation. Nor is there any expiation for a sin committed even once, if
it has been committed intentionally. But some people lay down expiation
even for sins committed intentionally.’

*Aṅgiras* (Do.).—‘If the sin has been committed unintentionally, penance
is performed; hut there is none for sins committed intentionally; even
if there be, it will have to be double of the former.’
