+++
title = "048 इह दुश्चरितैः"

+++
**(verses 11.48-52)**

\[See below.—12.53 *et seq*.\]

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.43-44).—‘They quote the following:—“Hear how the bodies
of those who, having committed various crimes, died a long time ago, and
were horn again, are marked:—A thief will have deformed nails, the
murderer of a Brāhmaṇa will he afflicted with white leprosy; he who has
drunk wine will have black teeth, and the violator of the Guru’s bed
will suffer from skin-diseases.”’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.6).—‘The man with deformed nails or black teeth should
perform the *Kṛcchra* penance of twelve days’ duration.’

*Viṣṇu* (45.1-33).—‘After having undergone the torments in the hells,
and having passed through the animal bodies, the sinners are born as
human beings with the following marks:—A criminal of the highest degree
shall have leprosy; a slayer of a Brāhmaṇa, consumption; a wine-drinker,
black teeth; a stealer of gold (belonging to a Brāhmaṇa), deformed
nails; a violator of his spiritual teacher’s bed a disease of the skin;
a calumniator, a stinking nose; a malicious informer, stinking breath; a
stealer of grain, a limb too little; one who steals by mixing (*i.e*.,
by taking good grain and replacing the same amount of bad grain in its
stead), a limb too much; a stealer of food, dyspepsia; a stealer of
words, dumbness; a stealer of clothes, white leprosy; a stealer of
horses, lameness; one who pronounces an execration against a God or a
Brāhmaṇa, dumbness; a poisoner, a stammering tongue; an incendiary,
madness; one disobedient to a Guru (father), the falling sickness; the
killer of a cow, blindness; the stealer of a lamb, the same; one who has
extinguished a lamp, blindness with one eye; a seller of tin, chowries,
or lead, is born a dyer of cloth; a seller of (horses or other) animals
whose foot is not cloven, is born a hunter: one who eats the food of a
person born from adulterous intercourse, is born as a man who suffers
his mouth to he abused; a thief (of other property than gold), is born a
bard; a usurer becoms epileptic; one who eats dainties alone, shall have
rheumatics; the breaker of a convention, a bald head; the breaker of a
vow of chastity, swelled legs; one who deprives another of his
subsistence, shall be poor; one who injures another (without
provocation), shall have an incurable illness. Thus according to their
particular sins, are men born, marked by evil-signs, sick, blind,
hump-backed, halting, one-eyed; others as dwarfs, or deaf, or dumb,
feeble-bodied (eunuchs, whitlows, and others). Therefore must penances
be performed by all means.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.209-215).—‘The Brāhmaṇa slayer becomes consumptive, the
wine-drinker has black teeth, the gold stealer has deformed nails; the
violator of the Guru’s bed suffers from skin diseases; the stealer of
food becomes dyspeptic; the stealer of words, dumb; the mixer of grains
has a limb too many; the back-biter has stinking nostrils; the stealer
of sesamum becomes the oil-drinking animal; calumniator has stinking
mouth; one who has intercourse with another’s wife and one who steals a
Brāhmaṇa’s property becomes a Brahmarākṣasa in a desolate forest; those
who steal gems are born in low castes; one who steals clothes suffers
from white leprosy.’
