+++
title = "058 रेतःसेकः स्वयोनीषु"

+++
**(verses 11.58-66)  
**

*Gautama* (21.1).—(See under 54.)

Do. (21.11).—‘The guilt of a minor offence rests on those who are
defilers of company, or killers of kine, or those who forget the Veda,
those who pronounce the Vedic texts for sinners, students who break the
vow of chastity, and those who allow the time of initiation to pass.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.2.5, 13).—‘Trading with merchandise of any description;
the following are the minor offences involving loss of caste.
Intercourse with women who should not he approached, cohabitation with
the female friend of a female *Guru*, with the female friend of a male
*Guru*, with an *Apapātra* woman, and a female outcast,—following the
medical profession, sacrificing for the multitude, living by the stage,
following the profession of the dancing master, or singing master or
acting master, tending cows and buffaloes, and so forth, and also
fornication.’

*Āpastamba* (1.21.7-9, 14-15, 17-18).—‘The following acts cause loss of
caste: stealing gold, crimes that make one accused, homicide, neglect of
the Vedas, causing abortion, incestuous connection with relations born
of the same womb as one’s father or mother, or with the offsprings of
such relations, drinking wine, intercourse with persons intercourse with
whom is forbidden. That man falls who has connection with a female
friend of a female *Guru*, or with a female friend of a male *Guru*, or
with any married woman. Eating forbidden flesh, as of a dog, a man, a
village-cock or village pigs, or carnivorous animals; eating what is
left by a Śūdra, the cohabitation of Aryans with *Apapātra* women. Some
say that these also lead to loss of caste.’

*Viṣṇu* (36.4-7).—‘Sexual connection with a paternal aunt, with the
maternal grandmother, with a maternal aunt, with the mother-in-law, with
the Queen—are crimes equal to connection with a *guru’s* wife;—and so is
sexual intercourse with the father’s or mother’s sister, and with one’s
own sister;—and sexual connection with the wife of a learned Brāhmaṇa,
or a priest, or an *Upādhyāya*, or a friend;—and with a sister’s female
friend, or with a woman of one’s own race, with a woman belonging to the
Brāhmaṇa caste, with a Brāhmaṇa maiden, with a low-caste woman, with a
woman in her courses, with a woman come for protection, with a female
ascetic, or with a woman entrusted to one’s own care.’

Do. (37.6-10, 13-33).—‘Abandoning one’s holy fire, or father, mother,
son or wife;—eating forbidden food, or food of those whose food should
not he eaten;—appropriating to one’s self what belongs to
another;—sexual intercourse with another man’s wife; sacrificing for
persons for whom it is forbidden to sacrifice;—killing a Kṣatriya or a
Vaiśya or a Śūdra, or a cow,—selling articles that should not be
sold,—for an elder brother to suffer his younger brother to marry before
him, for a younger brother to marry before his elder brother,—to give a
girl in marriage to either of these two,—or to perform the nuptial
ceremony for him,—to allow the proper time for *Upanayana* to pass
off,—to teach the Veda for a reward,—to he taught the Veda by a hired
teacher,—to be employed in mines,—to make large instruments,—cutting
trees, shrubs, creepers, long climbing plants, or herbs,—to make a
living by prostituting one’s own wife,—trying to overcome others by
incantations or forcible means; cooking for one’s own self,—omitting to
pay one’s debts to God, Sages and *Pitṛs*,—studying irreligious
hooks,—Atheism,—subsisting by a reprehensible act,—intercourse with
woman who drinks wine;—these are crimes of the fourth degree.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.231, 234-42).—‘Intercourse with a friend’s wife, with a
maiden, with one’s own offsprings, with a Caṇḍāla woman, with one’s
*Sagotra* woman, with one’s sons’ wives,—is declared to be equal to the
violating of the *guru’s* bed. Killing cows, apostacy, theft,
non-payment of debts, omitting to establish the sacred fires, selling
what should not be sold, marrying before the elder brother, learning
Veda from a hired teacher, teaching the Veda for payment, adultery,
permitting one’s self to be superseded in marriage by the younger
brother, usury, manufacturing salt, killing a woman, a Vaiśya, a Śūdra
or a Kṣatriya, making a living through reprehensible things, atheism,
breaking the vow of celibacy, selling of sons, stealing grains or base
metals or cattle, sacrificing for those not entitled to perform
sacrifices, abandoning of father, mother or son, selling of tanks or
gardens, defiling a maiden, sacrificing for one who has married before
his elder brother and giving of girl in marriage to such a person,
dishonesty, omitting of the observances and restrictions, undertaking of
an act for one’s own benefit, intercourse with a wine-drinking woman,
abandoning of Vedic study or of the sacred fires, neglecting one’s sons,
forsaking of relatives, cutting trees for fuel, making a living by one’s
own wife, or by medicines or by killing, making of murderous machines,
being addicted to vicious habits, selling one’s self, serving under a
Śūdra, making friendships with low men, intercourse with low-born women,
omitting the prescribed life-stages, getting fat with food given by
others, studying of evil sciences, superintending mines, selling one’s
wife;—each of these is a *minor sin*, an *upapātaka*.’
