+++
title = "090 सुराम् पीत्वा"

+++
**(verses 11.90-93)  
**

*Mahābhārata* (12.165.48).

*Gautama* (23.1).—‘They shall pour hot wine into the mouth of a Brāhmaṇa
who has drunk wine; he will be purified by death.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1.18, 19, 21).—‘If he has drunk *Surā* he shall scald
himself to death with hot wine. For unintentionally drinking *Surā*, he
shall perform the *Kṛcchra* penances during three months and then
undergo a second initiation. They quote the following—“A Brāhmaṇa, a
Kṣatriya or a Vaiśya who has unintentionally drunk the wine called
*Vāruṇī* must be initiated a second time.”’

*Āpastamba* (1.25.3).—‘A wine-drinker has to drink exceedingly hot
liquor, so that he dies.’

*Vaśiṣtha* (20-19, 22).—‘If a Brāhmaṇa intentionally drinks liquor other
than *Surā*, or if he unintentionally drinks *Surā*, he must perform a
*Kṛcchra* and an *Atikṛcchra*; and after eating clarified butter, be
initiated again. But a Brāhmaṇa who repeatedly partakes of *Surā* shall
drink liquor of the same kind boiling hot. He becomes pure by death.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.253-256).—‘The man who drinks *Surā* attains purity by
dying after drinking any one of the following things red-hot—*Surā*,
water, clarified butter, cow’s urine and milk. Or he may perform the
penance prescribed for Brāhmaṇa-killing, clothed in hair-cloth and
wearing matted looks; or for one year he may use sesamum oil-cake or
grains of rice at night only. If any one of the three castes unknowingly
drinks the *Vāruṇī* wine, ho shall undergo initiation a second time. The
Brāhmaṇa woman who drinks wine does not go to her husband’s regions; and
in the world she is born as a bitch.’

*Viṣṇu* (51-1).—‘A drinker of wine must abstain from all religious rites
and subsist on grains unseparated from the husk for one year.’
