+++
title = "103 गुरुतल्प्य् अभिभाष्यैनस्"

+++
**(verses 11.103-107)  
**

*Gautama* (23.8-11).—‘He who has defiled his *Guru’s* bed shall lay
himself down on a heated iron-bed; or he shall embrace the red-hot
iron-image of a woman; or he shall tear out his organ and testicles and,
holding them in his hands, walk straight towards the south-west, until
he falls down dead. He will be purified after death.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1.13-15).—‘He who has defiled his Guru’s bed shall lay
himself down on a heated iron bed;—or embrace the red-hot image of a
woman;—or cutting off his organ together with the testicles, and holding
them in his joined hands, he shall walk towards the south-west until he
falls down dead.’

*Āpastamba* (1.25.1-2).—‘He who has had connection with his *Guru’s*
wife shall cut off his organ together with the testicles, take them in
his joined hands and walk towards the south until he falls down dead. Or
he may die embracing a heated metal-image of a woman.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (22.13-14).—‘He who violates his *Guru’s* bed shall, cut off
his organ together with the testicles, take them in his joined hands and
walk towards the south; whenever he meets with an obstacle, there he
shall stand until he dies;—or having shaved all his hair and smeared his
body with clarified butter, he shall embrace the heated iron-image of a
woman. It is declared in the Veda that he is purified after death.’

*Viṣṇu* (34.1, 2;—53.1).—‘Sexual connection with one’s mother or
daughter or daughter-in-law is crime of the highest degree. Such
criminals of the highest degree should enter the flames; there is no
other way to atone for the crime. One who has had illicit sexual
intercourse must perform the *Prājāpatya* penance for one year according
to the rule of the *Mahāvrata*.’ (P. 839)

*Mahābhārata* (12.165.50-51).—(Same as Manu.)

*Yājñavalkya* (3.259-260).—‘The violator of his *Guru’s* bed should he
down on a heated iron-bed along with the iron-image of a woman; or
cutting out his testicles and holding them he shall give up his body
towards the south; or he shall perform the *Prājāpatya* penance for one
year, or the *Cāndrāyaṇa* for three months, and shall repeat the Vedic
text.’
