+++
title = "108 उपपातकसंयुक्तो गोघ्नो"

+++
**(verses 11.108-116)  
**

*Gautama* (22.18).—‘The penance for killing a cow is the same as that
for killing a Vaiśya (vow of continence to be kept for three years and
giving one cow and one bull).’

*Āpastamba* (1.26, 1).—‘If a milch cow or a full-grown ox has been
killed without reason, the expiation shall be the same as that for
killing a Śūdra (give ten cows with a bull).’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (21.18).—‘If he kills a cow, he shall perform, during six
months, a *Kṛcchra* or a *Taptakṛcchra*, clothed in the raw hide of that
cow.’

*Viṣṇu* (50, 16-24).—‘The man shall serve cows for a month, his hair and
beard having been shaven;—he shall sit down to rest when they rest; and
stand still when they stand still;—he shall give assistance to a cow
that has met with an accident;—and shall preserve cows from dangers;—he
shall not shelter himself against cold and similar dangers, without
having previously protected the cows against them;—he shall wash himself
with cow’s urine; and subsist upon the five bovine products;—this is the
*Go-vrata*, cow-penance, which must be performed by one who has killed a
cow.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.264-265).—‘The man who has killed a cow shall drink the
five bovine products for a month, sleeping in the cowpen, serving the
cows; and then by giving a cow, he becomes pure; or he shall calmly
perform the penance of *Prājāpatya Atikṛcchra*;—or having fasted for
three days, he shall give away ten cows with a hull as the eleventh.’

*Parāśara* (8.31-42).—‘Having shaved the whole head, he shall bathe
three times during the day, and live among cows during the night, and go
behind them during the day; when it is hot, or raining, or very cold or
when the wind is blowing strongly, he shall not protect himself until he
has protected the cows to the best of his ability. If he finds a cow
grazing in a field or in a threshing yarn—either his own or belonging to
some one else,—he shall not tell of it to any one; nor shall he tell any
one when he finds a calf sucking milk. He shall drink water when the
cows drink it, he down when they he down, and with all his strength
shall save a cow when she has either fallen down or stuck in mud. One
shall prescribe as penance for cow-killing a suitable *Prājāpatya* and
*Kṛcchra*: (Forms of these penances)—For one day he shall eat once; for
one day he shall eat only in the evening; for one day he shall eat only
what he gets without asking for it; and for one day he shall live on
air; for two days he shall eat only once; for two days he shall eat what
he gets without asking for it, for two days he shall eat only at night;
for two days he shall live on air. Each of these being done for three
days; and for four days. The prescribed penance having been performed,
he shall feed Brāhmaṇas, present them with fees and recite the sacred
texts. After feeding the Brāhmaṇas, the cow-killer becomes purified
without doubt.’
