+++
title = "118 अवकीर्णी तु"

+++
**(verses 11.118-123)  
**

*Yājñavalkya* (3.280).—‘The Student becomes an *Avakīrṇin* by
approaching a woman; he becomes purified by offering an ass to Nirṛti.’

*Viṣṇu* (37.35).—‘Criminals of the fourth degree shall perform the
*Cāndrāyaṇa* or *Parāka* penances, or shall sacrifice a cow.’

Do. (28.48-51).—‘A voluntary emission of semen by a twice-born youth
during the period of his studentship has been pronounced a transgression
of the rule prescribed for students. Having loaded himself with this
sin, he must go begging to seven houses, clothed only with the skin of
the cow, and proclaiming his deed; eating once only a meal consisting of
the alms received at those houses, and bathing three times, he becomes
absolved from guilt at the end of one year. After an involuntary
emission of semen during sleep, the twice-born student must bathe,
worship the sun and recite, three times, the mantra “Again shall my
strength return to me, etc.”’

*Gautama* (23.17-20).—‘A Student who has broken the vow of chastity
shall offer an ass to Nirṛti on the cross-road. Putting on the skin of
that ass, with the hair turned outside, and holding a red vessel in bis
hands, he shall beg at seven houses, proclaiming his deed. He will be
purified after a year. For an involuntary discharge caused by fear or
sickness, or during sleep, he shall make an offering of clarified
butter, or place two pieces of fuel in the fire reciting the two verses
beginning with “*Retasya*.”’

Do. (25.1-2).—‘They say.—How many gods does a Student enter who violates
the vow of chastity?—They announce—His vital spirits go to the Maruts,
his strength to Indra, his sacred learning to Bṛhaspati, all the rest to
Agni.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1.30-35).—‘A Student approaching a woman is called
*Āvakīrṇin*;—he shall offer an ass as the sacrificial animal; the
sacrificial meat-cake shall be offered to Nirṛti, or to Rakṣas, or to
Yama. Or, he may heap fuel on the fire on the night of the New Moon,
perform the preparatory rites required for the *Darvihoma*, and offer
two oblations of clarified butter. After he has made the offering, he
shall address the fire, closely joining his hands, turning sideways,
with the following texts “May the Maruts grant me, etc., etc.”’

*Āpastamba* (1.26.8-9).—‘A Student who has broken the vow of chastity
shall offer to Nirṛti an ass, according to the manner of the *Pākayajña*
rites,—a Śūdra eating the remnants of that offering.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (23.1-3).—‘If a Student has approached a woman, he shall slay
in the forest, at a place where four roads meet, an ass for the
*Rakṣas*, after kindling a common fire. Or, he may offer an oblation of
rice to Nirṛti. He shall throw the oblations with the mantra—“To Lust
*Svāhā*, etc.”’

*Pāraskara-Gṛhyasūtra* (3.12.1-3, 6-8).
