+++
title = "126 तुरीयो ब्रह्महत्यायाः"

+++
**(verses 11.126-130)  
**

*Gautama* (22.14-16).—‘For intentionally killing a Kṣatriy a, the normal
vow of continence must be kept for six years, and one should give away
one thousand cows with a bull. For killing a Vaiśya, the same penance,
for three years; and one should give away one hundred cows with a hull.
For killing a Śūdra, the same penance, for one year; and one should give
away ten cows with a bull.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.19.1-2).—‘For slaying a Kṣatriya, the offender shall
give to the King one thousand cows and also a bull in expiation of his
sin; for slaying a Vaiśya, one hundred cows; for slaying a Śūdra, a fee;
and a bull should be added in all cases.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1-8-10).—‘For killing a Kṣatriya he shall keep the
normal vow of continence for nine years;—for killing a Vaiśya, for three
years;—for killing a Śūdra, for one year.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.31-33).—‘Having slain a Kṣatriya, he shall perform a
penance during eight years; for killing a Vaiśya, during six years: for
killing a Śūdra, during three years.’

*Viṣṇu* (50.12-15).—‘He who has unintentionally killed a Kṣatriya, shall
perform the *Mahāvrata* for nine years;—he who has unintentionally
killed a Vaiśya, for six years;—he who has unintentionally killed a
Śūdra, for three years,’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.267-268).—‘For killing a Kṣatriya one should give away
a thousand cows with a bull; or he may perform, for three year, the
penance prescribed for Brāhmaṇa-killing; one who kills a Vaiśya shall
perform the same penance for one year, or give away one hundred cows;
one who has killed a Śūdra shall perform the same penance for six
months, or give away ten cows.’

*Āpastamba* (1.24.1-4).—‘One who has killed a Kṣatriya shall give away a
thousand cows for the expiation of his sin; he shall give a hundred for
killing a Vaiśya; and ten for killing a Śūdra; and in every case a bull
should be added for the sake of expiation.’
