+++
title = "170 गुरुतल्पव्रतङ् कुर्याद्"

+++
**(verses 11.170-171)  
**

[(See text under 49,
above.)]

*Gautama* (23.12, 13, 32).—‘The guilt of one who has intercourse with
the wife of a friend, a sister, a female belonging to the same family,
the wife of a pupil, a daughter-in-law,—or with a cow—is as great as
that of him who violates the Guru’s bed. Some people declare the guilt
of such a person to be equal to that of a Student who breaks the vow of
continence. For intercourse with a female of one of the lowest castes,
one shall perform a *Kṛcchra* penance during one year.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.2.13-14).—‘Intercourse with females who must not be
approached, cohabitation with the female friend of a female *Guru*, with
the female friend of a male *Guru*, with an *Apapātra* woman, or with a
female outcast,......... the expiation is to live like an outcast for
two years.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (20.15-16).—‘The expiation for intercourse with the wife of a
teacher, of a son, or of a pupil is that, having shaved all his hair and
smeared his body with clarified butter, the man shall embrace the heated
iron-image of a woman. If he has had intercourse with a female
considered venerable in the family, with a female friend, with the
female friend of a *Guru*, with an *Apapātra* female, or with an
outcast,—he shall perform the *Kṛcchra* penance for three months.’

*Viṣṇu* (34.1-2).—‘Sexual connection with one's mother, or daughter, or
daughter-in-law are crimes of the highest degree. Such criminals of the
highest degree should proceed to the flames; there is no other way of
atoning for their crime.’

Do. (53.1),—‘One who has had illicit sexual intercourse must perform the
*Prājāpatya* penance for one year,—according to the rule of the
*Mahāvrata*, clad in a garment of bark and living in a forest.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.231-232).—‘Intercourse with a friend’s wife, a maiden,
a uterine sister, with women of the lowest castes, with women of the
same *gotra*, with a daughter-in-law,—is declared to be as heinous as
that of violating the Guru’s bed. A man who has intercourse with his
father’s sister, or mother's sister, or maternal aunt, or
daughter-in-law, or step-mother, or sister, or his preceptor’s daughter,
or his preceptor’s wife, or his own daughter,—is *a violator of the
Guru’s bed*; he should have his organ cut off and killed; so also the
woman who fell in love with him.’
