+++
title = "180 संवत्सरेण पतति"

+++
*Mahābhārata* (12.165.37).—(Same as Manu.)

*Baudhāyana* (2.2.35).—‘He who associates with an outcast, by using the
same carriage or seat with him, becomes an outcast in one year; not so
by sacrificing for him, or teaching him, or forming a matrimonial
alliance with him.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (1.22).—‘They quote the following:—“He who during a year
associates with an outcast becomes an outcast; not by sacrificing for
him, or teaching him, or forming a matrimonial alliance with him, but by
using the same carriage or seat.”’

*Gautama* (21, 3).—‘He who associates for a year with outcasts (becomes
an outcast).’

*Viṣṇu* (35.3-5).—‘He who associates with an outcast becomes an outcast
himself after one year; and so does he who rides in the same carriage
with him, or who eats in his company, or who sits on the same bench, or
who lies on the same couch with him. Matrimonial intercourse,
sacrificial intercourse or vocal intercourse with an outcast entails
immediate loss of caste.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.261).—‘He who associates with these (outcasts) for one
year, himself becomes equal to them.’

*Devala* (Aparārka, p. 1086).—‘If a man knowingly lives with an outcast
for one year, he becomes mingled with him, and at the end of the year,
becomes an outcast himself. Sacrificing for the outcast, forming
matrimonial connections with him, teaching him, eating with him,—doing
these one becomes an outcast immediately.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘Occupying the same seat or couch with an outcast,
sitting in the same line with him, mixing up one’s cooked food with his,
using the same vessels, sacrificing for him, teaching him, going on the
same conveyance with him, eating with him; these are the nine forms of
*association*; this should not he done with low men.’

*Parāśara* (Do., p. 1088).—‘The Brāhmaṇa unintentionally forming
connections with outcasts becomes equal to him, either in five days, or
ten days, or twelve days, or half-a-year, or one year.’
