+++
title = "182 पतितस्योदकङ् कार्यम्"

+++
**(verses 11.182-185)  
**

[\[See above,
9.201.\]]

*Gautama* (20.4-9).—‘A slave or a hired servant shall fetch an impure
vessel from a dust-heap, fill it with water taken from the pot of a
female slave and, his face turned towards the south, upset it with his
foot, pronouncing the sinner’s name and saying: “I deprive so-and-so of
water.” All the kinsmen shall touch the slave, passing their sacred
thread over the right shoulder and under the left arm, and untying the
look on their heads. The spiritual teachers and the marriage-relatives
shall look on. Having bathed, they shall enter the village. He who
afterwards unintentionally speaks to the outcast shall stand, during one
night, repeating the *Gāyatrī*. If he converses with him intentionally,
he must perform the same penance for three nights.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.1.36).—‘Now the relatives shall empty (the water-pot of
a grievous offender) at a solemn meeting (and he shall confess), “I, N.
N., am (the perpetrator of) such and such (a deed).” After (the outcast)
has performed (his penance), the Brāhmaṇas shall ask him who has touched
water, milk, clarified butter, honey, and salt, “Hast thou performed
(the penance)?” The other (person) shall answer, ‘Om’ (yes)!’ They shall
admit him who has performed (a penance) to all sacrificial rites, making
no difference (between him and others).’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (15.12-16).—‘A slave, or the son of a low-caste woman, or a
relative not belonging to the same caste who is destitute of good
qualities, shall fetch a broken jar from a heap of useless rubbish,
place *Kuśa* grass with its top lopped off on *Lohita* grass on the
ground, and empty the jar with his left foot; and the relatives,
allowing their hair to hang down, shall touch the man who empties the
jar. Turning their left hands towards the spot, they may go home at
pleasure. After that they should not admit the outcast to sacred rites.
Those who admit him to sacred rites become equal to him.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.294).—‘The female slave and the relatives shall pour
the jarful of water outside the village for the outcast; and they shall
exclude him from all functions.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.57).—‘On the death-day of an outcast, a female slave of his
must upset a jar with water with her feet.’
