+++
title = "211 त्र्यहम् प्रातस्"

+++
*Gautama* (26.1-5).—‘Now we shall describe the *Kṛcchras*. During three
days, he shall eat at the morning-meal, sacrificial food, and fast in
the evening. Next he shall eat sacrificial food during another period of
three days, in the evening. Next, during another period of three days,
he shall not ask anything for food. Next, he shall fast during another
period of three days.’

*Baudhāyana* (2.238).—‘Eating during three days in the morning only,
during the next three days in the evening only, subsisting during
another three days on food given unasked, and fasting during three
days,—that is a *Kṛcchra* penance.’

Do. (4.5.6-7).—‘The *Kṛcchra* penance revealed by Prajāpati lasts twelve
days, which are divided into four separate periods of three days; during
the first period of three days, he eats in the day-time only; during the
second, at night only; during the third, he subsists on food given
without asking; and during the fourth, he lives on air. If one eats one
day in the morning only, and on the following day at night only; on the
next day, food given without asking; and on the fourth day, subsists on
air, and repeats this three times,—that is called *the Kṛcchra penance
of children*.’

*Āpastamba* (1.27.7).—‘The rule for the *Kṛcchra* penance of twelve days
is the following:—For three days he must not eat in the evening, and
then for three days, not in the morning; for three days he must live on
food given unasked; and for three days he must not eat anything.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (21.20).—‘During three days, he eats in the daytime only; and
during the next three days, at night only; he subsists during another
period of three days, on food offered without asking; and finally, he
fasts during three days. That is a *Kṛcchra* penance.’

*Viṣṇu* (46.10).—‘Let a man for three days eat in the evening only; for
another three days in the morning only; for further three days, food
given unsolicited; and let him fast entirely for three days;—that is the
*Prājāpatya*.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.320).—‘When the *Pāda-Kṛcchra* is in some way repeated
threefold, it is called Prājāpatya. \[ *Pāda-Kṛcchra* being that in
which the man eats once only during the day and night on one day, on the
next day at night only, on the third day, food got unasked, and on the
fourth day he fasts\].’
