+++
title = "216 एकैकं ह्रासयेत्"

+++
*Vaśiṣṭha* (23.45).—‘On the first day of the dark half of the month, let
him eat fourteen mouthfuls, and diminish the number by one daily, till
the end of the fortnight; in like manner, let him eat one mouthful on
the first day of the light half of the month and daily increase the
number by one, till the end of the fortnight.’

Do. (27.21).—‘Let him add daily one mouthful to his food during the
bright half of the month, let him diminish it daily by one mouthful
during the dark half, and let him fast on the moonless day; that is the
rule for the *Cāndrāyaṇa*.’

*Parāśara* (10.2).—(Same as Manu.)

*Gautama* (27.12-13).—‘On the full-moon day, he shall eat fifteen
mouthfuls, and during the dark half of the month daily diminish his
portion by one mouthful; he shall fast on the moonless day, and during
the bright half of the month daily increase his portion by one mouthful.
According to some, it should be the other way. That is a month occupied
by the *Cāndrāyaṇa* penance.’

*Baudhāyana* (3.8, 19-27; also, 4.517).—‘On the first day of the latter
half of the month, he eats fourteen mouthfuls; thus he takes every day
one mouthful less, up to the moonless day; on the moonless day there is
not even a mouthful to be taken; on the first day of the first half of
the month one mouthful may be eaten, on the second, two; thus he daily
increases his meal by one mouthful up to the full-moon day. On the
full-moon day, he makes an offering to Agni and to other deities... and
then gives a cow to a Brāhmaṇa. This is the *Ant-shaped Cāndrāyaṇa*. If
it is performed in the reverse order it is the *Barley-shaped
Cāndrāyaṇa*. A sinner who has performed either of these becomes free
from all mortal sins.’

*Viṣṇu* (47.1-6).—‘Now follows the *Cāndrāyāṇa*:—Let a man eat single
mouthfuls of food, unchanged in size; and let him, during the moon's
increase, add successively one mouthful every day; and during the wane
of the moon, let him take off one mouthful every day; and on the
moonless day, let him fast entirely. This is the *Barley-shaped
Cāndrāyaṇa*. The *Cāndrayaṇa* is called *Ant-shaped* when the moonless
day is placed in the middle, add it is called *Barley-shaped* when the
full moon day is placed in the middle.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.323).—‘When one is performing the *Cāndrāyaṇa*, during
the bright half of the month, one should increase daily, by one, the
number of food-morsels, each of which is of the size of the peacock’s
egg; and during the dark half, he shall reduce it daily by one.’
