+++
title = "003 पिता रक्षति"

+++
‘*Guarding*’ here stands for *averting of trouble*,—‘trouble’ consisting
in suffering caused by the transgression of the right course of conduct,
by illegal appropriation of property and so forth; and the ‘averting’ of
this consists in warding it off. This should be done by the father and
others.

The Present tense in ‘*guards*’ has the force of the Injunctive; such
use being a Vedic idiom; hence the word ‘*guards*’ should be taken to
mean ‘should guard’.

The mention of the three stages of her life separately is only meant to
show on whom lies the greater responsibility during a certain period of
the woman’s life. In reality all the male relatives are equally
responsible for her safety.

‘*Virginity*’—stands for the period preceding her being given away in
marriage.

Smilarly ‘*youth*’ stands for the period during which her husband is
alive.

Thus the words of the text are only reiterative of the actual state of
things; the sense being that the woman shall be guarded by that man
under whose tutilage she may he living at the time. It is for this
reason that even during her husband’s life-time, the responsibility for
the woman’s protection rests upon her father and her son also. This is
what has been declared in the laws of Manu; which means that all of them
shall guard her at all times; and this has not been stated in so many
words, as that would have made the text prolix.

“What is asserted here has been already declared above, under 5. 147.”

Not so; ‘independence’ is one thing and ‘guarding’ is another. 5.147 has
declared that woman shall not be ‘independent’, while the present text
lays down that she shall be ‘guarded’, as a matter of fact even while
the woman is ‘dependent’ upon some one else, she may be open to danger,
which has got to be averted.

“But in the present text also it is said that ‘the woman is not fit for
*independence*.”

Our answer to this is that the present text does not lay down that she
shall not be independent in regard to anything at all; all that it means
is that her mind being not quite under her control, she is not capable
of guarding herself, specially as she does not possess the requisite
strength. Under discourse V on the other hand, the absence of
‘independence’ laid down is in regard to something totally different
(*i.e*. her property).—(3).


