+++
title = "018 नाऽस्ति स्त्रीणाम्"

+++
Some people entertain the following notion;—“Even though woman may
misbehave, she may, with the help of Vedic texts, perform some rites in
the shape of secret Expiatory Rites and thus become pure; so that there
cannot be much harm in her misbehaving”

But this is not true; because ‘*for women there is no dealing with
sacred texts*’; so that there can be no repeating of the texts; which,
with the help of her own learning, she might do whenever she
transgressed and thereby regain her purity. For this reason also they
should be carefully guarded;—this is the injunction to which the
statement in the present verse is a declamatory supplement.

Some people have held that the present verse contains the absolute
prohibition of the use of sacred texts in connection with all kinds of
rites for women; and holding this opinion, they declare that whatever
rites may be performed, by whomsoever, for the sake of women,—that is,
(a) in rites where women figure as the performers, as in the making of
offerings, or (b) in those where they figure as the object to be
sanctified, as in the tonsure-ceremony, or (c) in those where they
figure as recipients, us in *śrāddhas* offered to them,—at all these the
use of sacred texts being forbidden by the present text, no such texts
should be used at the *śrāddhas* offered to women.

But these people say what is not reasonable; because the present text
refers to a totally different matter, and is a purely hortatory
supplement. And it still remains to be explained what there is in the
text to indicate either injunction or prohibition regarding such rites
as the Tonsure and the like. As for the inability of women to recite the
expiatory texts, this follows from the fact of their not learning the
Vedas.

‘*Destitute of Organs*’—‘*Organ*’ here stands for *strength*;—courage,
patience, intelligence, energy and so forth are absent in women; that is
why they are prone to become over-powered by sinful propensities. Hence
it is that they have to be carefully guarded.

‘*Women are false*’;—on account of the inconstancy of their character
and affections, they are deprecated as being ‘false’—(18)


