+++
title = "019 तथा च"

+++
The author now puts forward, in support of the assertion that ‘by their
nature women are impure in their hearts’, Vedic texts and declamatory
passages.

\[The author says\]—I have declared that ‘women are false’; and this
same fact is assorted in the texts of the Vedas also.

The term ‘*nigama*’ is synonymous with ‘*veda*’, and is found to be used
as such. The term ‘*nigama*’ is also found to be used as a name for that
subsidiary science which explains the meaning of vedic texts,—*i.e*. in
such statements as ‘*Nigama Nirukta* and *Vyākaraṇa* are the subsidiary
sciences.’ In the *Nirukta* also in found the expression—‘These are
*nigamas*’; and the term ‘*nigama*’ here cannot be taken as standing for
anything else but ‘Vedic texts’, as is dear from the examples cited.
Thus it is only right that in the present text the term ‘*nigama*’
should be taken as standing for the *Veda*.

The texts are spoken of as ‘*in the Veda*’, which presupposes the
relation of constainer and contained, on the understanding that there is
some sort of difference between the whole and its parts.

In the *Nigama*, Veda, there are ‘*texts*’, sentences, forming part of
it, which are ‘*sung*’— recited, repeated, read there. In fact no
limitation of time (part, present or future) is applicable to the case
of the Veda, which is *ever present*.

‘*Nigadāḥ*’ is another reading for ‘*nigītā*’. In this case ‘*nigada*’
would mean *the mantra-texts*; and the term ‘*śruti*’ would mean the
*Brāhmaṇa texts*’, and the meaning would be that ‘this fact *that women
are false* is stated in both *Mantra* and *Brāhmaṇa* texts.’

In this latter leading the construction would be—‘*bahvyaḥ santi*’,
‘there *are* many such texts’,—the verb ‘*santi*’, ‘are’, being added.

From among these texts listen to those that are meant to be ‘expiatory’
of the sin of unchastity.

“Why are the said texts put forth?”

‘*For the purpose of indicating the true character of women*.’ *True
character* means the permanent feature of their nature, and the texts
are meant to expose this.

‘*Character*’ means *disposition*; and the disposition meant here is
*proneness to unchastity*.—(19)


