+++
title = "020 यन् मे"

+++
The particle ‘*iti*’ at the end of the third quarter of the verse
indicates that up to that point we have the part of an original Vedic
text.

‘*If my mother, unfaithful unto her lord*’,—she who observes the vow
‘may I never, even in my mind, conceive love for any man other than my
husband’ is called ‘*faithful unto her lord*’; the opposite of that is
‘*unfaithful unto her lord*’:—‘*roaming about*’— in the houses of other
people,—seeing a gaily dressd (dressed?) person—‘*became
enamoured*’—conceived a desire for that other man;—‘*that*’— impurity or
evil in my birth, ‘*may the semen of my fatter remove*’; *i.e*., may
that impurity be washed off by that semen. The nominative ending in
‘*pitā*’ has the force of the genetive. Or the *semen* itself may be
taken in apposition to the ‘father’; which it can be without having its
gender altered, just as we have in other phrases: ‘*dyaurme pita*’, ‘the
heaven, my father’ (*where* ‘*dyauḥ*’ in the feminine, is in apposition
to ‘father’).

Or ‘*semen*’ may be taken as standing for the *mother’s* seed; and in
that case the meaning would be—‘may my father purify that seed of my
mother’; *i.e*., may the impurity of the mother’s seed be removed by the
force of the father’s seed.

‘*This is an example*’— instance—‘*of this*’—*i.e*., of the proneness of
women to unchastity.

All men when reciting sacred texts recite the one here quoted; and the
reciting of such a text by all men would be justified only if all women
were prone to unchastity; otherwise, if only some were so, the use of
the text would not be universal.

The text here quoted has been prescribed as to be recited during the
‘*Cāturmāsya*’ sacrifice, as also at *śrāddhas*, during the
‘*Padyānumantraṇa*’ rite.—(20)


