+++
title = "037 इयम् भूमिर्"

+++
The foregoing verse has described the fact that the qualities of the
seed are reproduced in the product; the present verse is going to show
that the qualities of the soil are not so reproduced.

‘*This earth is called the womb*’—soil of production—‘*of
things*’—*i.e*., herb, vegetables, thickets, creepers and other
immovable things; and yet none of the qualities of the earth are found
in these things, neither clay nor dust bring found in them.

‘*The seed does not develop in its development*’.—The term ‘*seed*’ here
stands for the corn growing out of the sprouts, and not for the loots.
The corn, left over after consumption, when sown, again becomes the
seed; and this does not ‘*develop*’—reproduce;—the reproduction of
qualities being a part of the ‘development,’ we have the present tense
in ‘develops,’—acquires, obtains—‘*the qualities of the womb*’—in its
constituent parts, if the verb ‘develops’ itself had stood for the
*reproduction* that forms part of the development, then the term ‘in its
development’ would be superfluous. Hence, according to the principle
that verbal roots have several meanings, the verb ‘develops’ has to be
taken as denoting something else. Or, the term ‘*in its development*’
may be taken as only serving the purpose of filling up the metre; and
the superfluity thus explained somehow. Or the two terms, ‘*in its
development*’ and ‘*develops*’, may be explained as standing
respectively for the general and special forms; just as in the
expression ‘*svapoṣam* *puṣṭaḥ*’, ‘nourished by his own
nourishment.’—(87)


