+++
title = "041 तत् प्राज्ञेन"

+++
The *prima facie* argument having been put forward, the present verse
sets forth the established doctrine; and what the text means is that the
soil is the predominant factor.

*Objection*—“In the text there is no word signifying the predominance of
the soil; all that is declared is the prohibition of having recourse to
other’s wives—‘*shall not sow in another’s wife*’; which means that one
should not let his semen enter another man’s wife; and it does not mean
that the child belongs to the person to whom the soil belongs.”

True; but when we take the present text along with what follows (under
43) regarding ‘the seed sown in what belongs to another’ being
‘lost’,—it becomes clear that the prohibition of intercourse contained
in the present verse is based upon the consideration that the child born
would be taken away by another, and it is not with a view to any
spiritual result The prohibition based upon spiritual considerations has
in fact already gone before (4.134); where it has been said that ‘there
is nothing so conducive to the shortening of life etc.’ Thus the
conclusion is that, (inasmuch as the present prohibitive text is
supplementary to another text (43), with which it has to be construed,
we are not free to interpret it as we choose; so that the only right
course is to take it as declaring the predominance of the soil.

‘*Intelligent*,’—possessed of inborn intelligence.

‘*Well-trained*’— thoroughly educated by his father and others.

‘*Conversant with the sciences and the arts*’.—The terms ‘*jñāna*’ and
‘*vijñāna*’ connote instrumentality (meaning *jñāyate anena iti
jñānam*’, and ‘*vijñāyate anena iti vijñānam*’). So that the term
‘*jñāna*’, ‘*science*’, stands for the sciences subsidiary to the Veda,
and ‘*vijñāna*’, ‘*arts*’, for the art of reasoning and the fine arts.

The sense of the verse is that the man who is possessed of any
intelligence should never do such an act; since such is the law laid
down in all scriptures. As regards the ignoramus, who is as good as an
animal, the present, teaching is not meant for him at all. Hence what is
stated here is purely reiterative.

‘*If he desires longevity*’.—This has been added with a view to indicate
that the present prohibition is the same as that contained under
Discourse IV; and this sets aside the idea as to its being a distinct
prohibition.—(41)


