+++
title = "047 सकृद् अंशो"

+++
This has been explained by us under the [section on ‘Rescision’
(8.227)](/hinduism/book/manusmriti-with-the-commentary-of-medhatithi/d/doc201157.html).

At the time of partition, if the co-partners are such as are entitled to
equal as well as unequal shares, they should divide the property in such
equal and unequal shares. This partition having been once made, some one
of the co-partners may subsequently raise objections to it. It is such
subsequent objection that the ‘present verse is meant to preclude. If,
however, at the very outset, the party were to indicate the inadequacy
of his share, then, the partition should have to be revised. If, on the
other hand, the objecter should declare the inequity of the partition
after the lapse of a long time, all that he can claim is the
equalisation of his own share, and not a rescission of the whole
partition; since during the time that has elapsed each co-partner will
have made additions to his share, or carried out repairs to what may
have been in a dilapidated condition, or used up the clothes and gold
and other things \[so that a re-partition of the entire inheritance
would not be possible\].

Others, however, explain the declaration regarding ‘the share falling
only once’ to mean that—‘if after the partition, it be discovered
subsequently that there are some among the co-partners who are affected
by impotence or some such physical defect as disqualifies him from
receiving a share in the property,—there shall be no resumption of these
shares by the others.’

Similarly, if there be some co-partners who are really entitled to two,
three or four shares, but somehow at the time of partition, all of them
receive equal shares, then, if, after sometime, they were to complain,
they should not be permitted to annul the former partition.

In the case of the outcast, however, there is resumption of his share,
as we shall explain later on.

‘*The maiden is given away only once*.’—Though this would imply that the
husband acquires ownership over the girl immediately after verbal
betrothal,—even before the marriage has been performed,—yet what is
really meant is that particular time which is indicated by such
declarations as ‘One might take away a girl even though she may have
been betrothed’ (*Yājñavalkya*, 1.65) and ‘The marriage is to be
regarded as accomplished at the seventh step’ (*Manu*, 8.227). This we
have already explained above.

“*Once does one say ‘I give*’”—Cows and other things are given away to
others in the same form of ownership that, the giver himself has over
them; but the maiden belongs to the father as ‘daughter,’ while she is
given away to the other party as his ‘wife’; so that the father’s
relationship to her does not cease. It is for this reason that she has
been mentioned separately (in the sentence ‘the maiden is given away
only once’).

*Objection*.—“If the father’s ownership and relationship does not cease,
how can the ‘giving away of the maiden’ be said to be accomplished? It
is in the very nature of the act of *giving* that the ownership of one
ceases and that of another is brought about.”

There is no force in this objection. In the case in question there are
two relationships,—that of parent and child, and that of owner and
owned, and while the former remains intact, the latter does cease. This
is what is meant when verse 5.188 declares that ‘During childhood the
girl should remain under her father,’ and ‘under her husband during
youth,’ which indicates the cessation of the father’s ownership and the
coming into existence of that of the husband.—(27)


