+++
title = "059 देवराद् वा"

+++
This verse enjoins the practice of ‘*Niyoga*’, hemmed in by all its
qualifications.

‘On *failure of issue, the woman, on being authorised, may obtain,
offspring in the proper manner*,’—from her younger brother-in-law and
others.

This ‘*failure of issue*’ is the ‘distress’ referred to under verse 56.

The term ‘*issue*’, ‘*antāna*’, here stands for the *son*; as regards
the *daughter*, she is regarded as^(‘)issue’ only when she has been
‘appointed,’ as it is only then that she *carries on* (‘*santanoti*’),
perpetuates, her father’s family; which is not done by the daughter, in
ordinary circumstances.

The ‘*failure*’ of such issue consists in no son being born, or in a
son, though born, dying off, and in the *non-appointment* of a daughter
(by the husband). We shall explain later on that the woman is not
entitled to have an ‘appointed daughter’ or any other substitute for the
son. She may, therefore bring forth a child only when authorised by her
elders.

“Whence is the idea obtained that the authorisation is to be done *by
her elders*?”

It is obtained from other Smṛti-texts. Or, the idea follows from the
very name ‘*niyoga*’, ‘authorisation’. In ordinary parlance
‘authorisation’ is always understood as proceeding from a superior; when
the teacher does the teaching, he is not spoken of as being ‘authorised’
by his pupil to do it; in fact it is the pupil that is spoken of as
being ‘authorised’ to read and repeat the lessons.

The ‘*elders*’ meant here are the mother-in-law, the father-in-law, the
younger brother-in-law and other persons belonging to her husband’s
family,—and not the woman’s own father and other relations. Because if a
child is born as the result of this ‘authorisation’, it is only the
former who come to be known as ‘with offspring’, and who become
benefitted by the after-death rites performed by that child.

“If that were the sole criterion, then, since the child’s maternal
grandfather also would benefit by the rites performed by his
grand-child, it would follow that the said ‘authorisation’ could be done
by him also.”

This has been already answered by the explanation that those persons
alone are to ‘authorise’ who would become known as ‘with offspring’
through the child born as the result of that authorisation. Further,
when the verse speaks of the ‘*younger brother-in-law*’ and the
‘*sapiṇḍa*’, all persons belonging to the same *gotra* come to the mind.
In the *Mahābhārata* also, in several places, it is shown that
‘authorisation’ can proceed only from the woman’s relations on the
husband’s side. It is for this same reason that there is to be no
‘authorisation’ when the husband’s brother’s son is present.

“As a matter of fact, the benefits from the issue occur to only those
persons who are ‘authorised’ to beget the offspring; in fact only those
persons are entitled to ‘authorisation’ who are eager to obtain the
benefits of the issue, in the shape of the love and satisfaction derived
from the son. Thus then, no benefits can occur to one who is dead; how
then can the child be said to be the ‘issue’ of the latter?”

Our answer to this is that the dead person also does obtain benefits, in
the shape of the offering of libations and so forth; and that this is so
is clearly asserted in authoritative texts. Though it is true that the
dead person has not carried out the injunction regarding the begetting
of a child; yet the scriptures clearly lay down that libations are
offered to him by the child that may be begotten in the ‘soil’ belonging
to him, (*i.e*. on his wife), according to the law of ‘authorisation’.
And from this it follows that benefits for the issue do accrue to the
dead father also. How this is we shall explain fully later on.

‘*Younger brother-in-law*’—the husband’s brother.

‘*Sapiṇḍa*’—a person belonging to the husband’s family. This is what is
understood to be meant by the law in other Smṛti-texts regarding the
child being obtained from any person ‘*of the same caste*’.

‘*In the proper manner*’.—This refers to the rules regarding the man
annotating himself with clarified butter and so forth.

‘*The desired offspring may be obtained*’— The verbal affix has the
force of the Injunctive. The term ‘*desired*’ indicates the capacity for
fulfilling his duties; which implies that in the event of a girl or a
blind or deaf son being born, the process of ‘authorisation’ may be
repeated.—(59)


