+++
title = "061 द्वितीयम् एके"

+++
A second son also should be begotten;—such is the opinion of some
people.

‘*Learned in the subject*’—persons versed in the laws relating to the
*begetting* of ‘*Kṣetraja*’ sons.

‘*Perceiving that the purpose of authorisation is not
accomplished*’.—These people hold that the injunction, that ‘the woman
on being authorised should begot a child’, is not fulfilled by the
begetting of a single son.

What is the real intention of these men?

They hold that the singular number (in the word ‘son’ in the injunction
‘a son is to be begotten’) is not meant to be significant; since it is
the *substance* that forms the more important factor, and no
qualification attaches to the act, which shows that no significance can
attach to the singular number; just as in the case of the word ‘cup’ (in
the injunction ‘wash the cup’).

“In the case of injunctions of things not already spoken of elsewhere,
even though the *substance* is recognised as the predominant factor, yet
the significance of such specifications as those by means of number and
such qualifications remains undisturbed; *e.g*., in such injunctions as
the ‘twice-born man shall marry *a woman*’. Then from the indicative
power of such mantra-texts as ‘Beget ten sons on this girl’, it is clear
that the number *one* as pertaining to *children* is not to be observed.

“In that case the man need not rest with *two* sons only.” In fact it is
in view of this that the text has added the term ‘*second*’, the use
whereof lies in the precluding of the possibility of more sons than two.
This same is the sense of the *mantra-text* also, which pertains to the
‘*aurasa*’ (body-born) son, the text occuring in the section on
Marriage. In the present instance however, all that is intended is the
exceeding of the number ‘one’; and this on the strength of the saying
current, among cultured people that ‘a man with one son is as good as
sonless’, or on that of the present verse containing the eulogisation of
the second son.

‘*On* *the* *basis of propriety*’—*i.e*. on the strength of the practice
of cultured people.—(61)


