+++
title = "064 नाऽन्यस्मिन् विधवा"

+++
This is the prohibition of the practice of ‘authorisation’, which has
been sanctioned in the foregoing texts.

In this connection, some people have held the following view:—“Inasmuch
as the text contains the term ‘*widow*’, it prohibits the practice only
with reference to the woman whose husband is dead; so that the impotent
husband should still ‘authorise’ his wife; both the sanction and the
prohibition would thus have distinct spheres of application.”

Others, however, have held the following opinion:—“The text, that
sanctions the practice mentions the *failure of issue* as the occasion
for it; and as a matter of fact, this occasion is equally present in
both cases,—in the case of the husband being impotent or invalided, as
also in that of his being dead. So that as the sanction, so the
prohibition also, must be accepted as free from restrictions. Then
again, a woman is called ‘*vidhavā*’ (widow) when she ceases to have any
intercourse with her ‘*dhava*’ or husband; and this condition is equally
present in both cases.”

It is this latter view that has to be accepted; as otherwise, the rules
regarding ‘anointment with clarified butter’ and other details would not
be applicable to the case of ‘authorisation’ by the impotent or
invalided husband; because the text that lays down that rule uses the
term ‘widow’—“He who has been authorised *in regard to the widow*, etc.’
(Verse 60). For these reasons, just as the preceding sanction, so the
subsequent prohibition also, should be taken as free from all
limitations. And thus the sphere of application of both being the same,
we must take the case as being one of *option*. This option is possible
only in view of the obligatory character of the injunction regarding the
begetting of children; the case being analogous to the option bearing
upon the ‘holding’ and ‘not holding’ of the *Śoḍaśi* Cups. If, on the
other hand, the injunction of begetting a son were regarded as
consisting in such assertions as ‘by means of a son one wins heaven’,
and so forth, (where the act of begetting a son is put forward as
loading to a certain desirable result), the effect of one having no
children would only be the non-performance of the after-death rites. So
that the results of the two acts (begetting of a child by
‘authorisation’ and not begetting a. child by that method) would be
totally distinct; and under the circumstances, whence could there he any
*option*? It is only when the sanction and the prohibition both hear
upon the same object that there can be *option*; as is the case with the
‘holding’ and ‘not holding’ of the *Śoḍaśi* Cups.

It has already been pointed out that when an act is done along with all
its subsidiary details, its results are fuller than what they are when
it is done without those details; but so far as the accomplishment of
the main act itself is concerned, there is no difference. So that, in
this case the only effect would be that the man not having recourse to
the practice would fail to obtain the benefits that would he conferred
by the son; and if he has recourse to the practice with a view to
obtaining those special benefits, then he would he transgressing the
prohibition, and his act would stand on the same footing as the
performance of the *Śyena* sacrififie (which is performed for the
special purpose of obtaining the death of the enemy, and involves the
transgression of the prohibition of all *hilling*).

“In connection with this object, the following point deserves to be
considered in regard to the man who is ‘authorised’ (to have connection
with the ‘widow’)—Why does he have recourse to the act? There is no such
injunction for him as that ‘when one is *authorised* he should have
intercourse with the widow’; as there *is* for the woman, in the form of
the text (59)—‘the woman, being duly authorised, etc.’ It would not be
right to argue that—“since the ‘authorisation’ of the woman can he
accomplished only when her younger brother-in-law or some other male
relation would also ad, the action of these latter also is implied by
that same injunction (which prescribes the^(‘)authorisation’ of the
woman),—since what is desired by the women is the *Kṣetraja* son (and
this cannot be obtained without the action of the male).”

“This cannot be right, because the action of tin; male might proceed
from carnal desire also.

“If the injunction did not imply the action of the male, there would be
no sense in the rules laying down *anointing with clarified butter* and
other details.

“These rules would not he meaningless; as their meaning would he that
the son can he called ‘*Kṣetraja*’ only when he is born in the manner
prescribed, and in no other circumstances.

“Some people have leld that the general injunction that ‘one must obey
the injunction of his elders’ is what prompts the male in question.

“But if this were allowed, then one would he justified in drinking wine
and doing such forbidden ads, by the wish of his elders to do so. As a
matter of fact, one who would prompt the man to have recourse to such
acts would not be an ‘elder’ at all. Then again, there is the law—‘The
abandoning of the elder is enjoined, if he is vain or ignorant of what
should and what should not be done, or has recourse to the wrong path’;
and the ‘abandoning’ meant here can only consist in *ceasing to work for
the elder*.

“This same reasoning does away with the following view also:—‘The
assertion, (in 63) that by acting contrary to the rules relating to the
details of the practice of ‘authorisation,’ the parties concerned become
outcasts, implies the sanctioning of the action of both, in accordance
with those rules. Otherwise, if the action of the man involved the
penalty of outcasting in all kinds of intercourse, there would be no
point in the declaration that he becomes an outcast under the special
circumstances (of acting contrary to the rules).’

“Then again, the idea, that—‘in the case of there being no transgression
of the rules the man alone becomes an outcast, whereas, when there is
transgression of them, both parties become outcasts’—is also derived
from the indicative power of the texts themselves.

“Thus then, the action of the youger brother in-law and other male
relations has got to be explained (and justified).”

Our explanation is as follows:—Judging from the instance of Vyāsa and
others, it has to be admitted that, in the begetting of the ‘*Kṣetraja*’
son, if one acts according to the behests of his elders, there can be
nothing wrong in it In the case of Vyāsa and other great men, their
action can never be regarded as having been prompted by carnal desire.’
Then, as for the argument that “the assertion that the parties become
outcasts if they transgress the rules, is indicative of the act of the
male”.—this cannot be right; for, if the male became an outcast, then,
the son born of him would not be entitled to the performance of any
rites; so that the begetting of the child would be absolutely futile.
From all this, it follows that there is just a semblance of an
injunction for the action of the younger brother-in-law or other male
relations.—(64)


