+++
title = "066 अयन् द्विजैर्"

+++
This also is a declamatory supplement to the prohibition of
‘authorisation.’ The ‘*ignorant*’ men, who do not know the scriptures,
and who do not understand that the indicative power of the texts points
to something entirely different,—‘*introduced*’ ‘*this bestial
practice*,’ which is most ‘*reprehensible*,’ ‘*among men also*’; and
this was done not during modern times, but ‘*during the* *time that
Vena*’—(he first king—‘*was ruling over his kingdom*’—looking after his
realm.

“It has been said that there are no sacred texts indicative of
prevalence of this practice.”

Not so; what was said was that there was no such indicative in the texts
recited at marriage; in other texts there certainly are words indicative
of it; for instance, there is the *mantra*—‘*Ko vā sa putro vidhaveva
deraram mayā nu doṣo kṛṇute sadhastha*’ (Ṛgveda, 10.40.2),—which means
‘who is the woman that invites you Aśvins to her bed in the manner in
which the widow invites to her bed her younger brother-in-law,—that you
do not come up?’

“But what peculiarity is there in the *mantras* used at marriage (that
capital is made of there being no indication *in them* of the practice
in question)?”

What is meant is that the texts connected with marriage are more nearly
connected with the subject of the begetting of children.

Others read ‘*vidvadbhiḥ*’ (for ‘*avidvadbhiḥ*’); and the meaning of
this would be—‘This practice, of having intercourse with the brother’s
wife, which is fit for beasts, *has been declared* *by* *the learned to
be reprehensible, for men*,—and it was introduced during the reign of
King Vena.’—(66)


