+++
title = "076 प्रोषितो धर्मकार्यार्थम्"

+++
It has been said that a man may go abroad ‘on business’; the present
verse proceeds to show the several kinds of ‘business,’—the time of
waiting varying with the nature of the business.

The text has said nothing as to what the wife should do after having
waited for the eight years. And on this point, some people on the
strength of Context, say that she should maintain herself by
unobjectionable industries.

This however is not right Because, if the maintaining of herself by
unobjectionable industries referred to the time after the eight years of
waiting,—then, before the⁻ lapse of that time, is she to die? Suicide is
not considered desirable for her, just as it is not for the man; being,
as it is, forbidden for all. Hence, the conclusion appears to be that
before the lapse of the said time she shall maintain herself by
unobjectionable industries; but after that she may have recourse to
objectionable ones also.

Others hold that after the said time, the woman may deviate from
chastity;—as says smother Smṛti text—‘When the husband is lost, or dead,
or become a renunciate, or impotent, or an outcast—in the event of these
five calamities smother husband is permitted for women.’ (Parāśara).

Others again hold the following view:—Even in ignorance, it is not open
to the woman to renounce her chastity. In fact, it has been laid down
among the duties of women (under 5.156) that ‘on the death of her
husband she shall not even utter the name of another man’; so that
deviation from chastity is not permissible even on the death of her
husband,—what to say as to when he has only gone abroad. As regards the
Smṛti-text quoted, the word ‘*pati*’ ‘husband,’ is used there in the
sense of *protector*, just as in the case of such terms as
‘*grāmapati*’, ‘*senāpati*’ and so forth. So that all that the present
text means is that—‘she should no longer remain dependent upon her
husband, she may undertake the work of the toilet-maid or some such
thing, under another man who would give her food’; and when she has
entered into a contract for such service extending over six months, or a
year—if the husband happen to turn up and claim her, asking the employer
to give her up,—he can claim her restitution, before the lapse of the
eight years; as before that she belongs to her husband.

Other matters relating to this subject have been fully dealt with under
Discourse V.

This same view has been accepted by many others also.

Other people, however, hold that the text sanctions recourse to the life
of the ‘remarried widow’ (after the lapse of the time mentioned). If a
woman is abandoned by her husband,—or if her husband, after having made
provision for her, does not return during the said time, and she is as
good as abandoned by him,—‘then, she may he married by another man,
according to the practice of ‘widow remarriage’; and if the former
husband happen to return after that, he can say nothing, and she shall
continue to be the wife of the second husband.

This however is not right; since ‘neither by sale nor by repudiation is
the wife released from her husband.’ (Manu 9.46); and the uses of this
text we shall explain later on.

‘*For a sacred duty*’— The compound ‘*dharmakāryam*’ being explained as
a *karmadhāraya*—‘*dharma*’—‘sacred’—‘*kārya*’—duty; and that which is
for purposes of this is ‘*dharmakāryārtham*.’

*Objection*—“For the house-holder, wherefore should there he any
protracted journey abroad *for a sacred duty*? It is incumbent upon him
to attend upon the Fires, to perform the

Five Sacrifices. How too can he remain away during the spring season?
Since he has got to perform the *Jyotiṣ* -sacrifice during the spring.
Even such acts as bathing in sacred places and the like, which are
enjoined by *Smṛti* texts, have to be performed by him only so long as
they are compatible with those laid down by *Śruti* texts. These could
not be possible even for one who has gone abroad after having made
arrangements for the maintenance of the fires and other such *Śrauta*
rites. Since it has been laid down that ‘journeys, after proper
arrangements during absence, are permissible only till the next New or
Full Moon’; and it has also been declared that ‘on the New or Full Moon
Day the man shall pour the libations *himself*.’ Even for one who has
not laid the Fires, if pilgrimages were undertaken,—even though these
and the performance of the Five Sacrifices would stand upon the same
footing, both being laid down by *Smṛti* texts,—yet as both the acts are
laid down as to be done by him along with his wife, there should be no
pilgrimage if the wife were left behind.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—What is said here refers to the
commands of one’s elders;—‘*i.e*., to the case where the man is sent out
by his elders, either for acquiring merit, a for attendance upon the
king, or on some business of their own,—this going abroad would be
‘*for* *a sacred duty*.’ Or, it may refer to the performance of such
Expiatory Rites as consist in wandering about hermitages and such
places. Or, ‘*for* *satred duty*’ may stand for the *acquiring of
wealth*,—the man being poor and seeking to earn wealth by some means.
‘Or *for the sake of learning*.’—

Objection—“But the taking of a wife is possible only.after one has taken
the Final Bath, which is possible only for one who has completed his
studies and already acquired learning; wherefore then could there be any
possibility for a married man to seek for *learning*?”

It has been already explained that even after learning a little of what
is contained in the Veda, a man becomes entitled to marry, and also to
the Final Bath and other Ceremonies.

“This cannot be right; there is Final Bath only after the ‘enquiry into
Dharma’ has been completed; and ‘enquiry’ consists in “coming to a
definite conclusion after due consideration and clearing of doubts.”

True; but the present text does not contain the injunction that ‘one
should seek for learning.’ If it were so, then it would be already
included under the ‘purpose of sacred duty’. Then again, even though the
man may have acquired sufficient learning to entitle him to Bath and
Marriage, yet it would be open to him to seek for further proficiency
and practice, specially in the new sciences.

Journey is said to be ‘for fame’, when one goes abroad for advertising
his bravery or learning.

‘*For pleasure*’,—for instance, when one follows a prostitute; or goes
about seeking for a more desirable wife.

Another *Smṛti* text lays down the period of time in reference to the
children born:—Says *Viṣṇu*—‘The Brāhmaṇa shall wait till eight children
are born, the Kṣatriya six and the Vaiśya four.’

There is no time-limit in the case of *Śūdras*. But some people declare
the limit in their case to be *one* *year*.—(76)


