+++
title = "080 मद्यपासाधुवृत्ता च"

+++
‘*Drunkard*’—addicted to drinking wine; and hence incapable of looking
after cooking, and other household work. Such a woman deserves
“supersession.” If she persists in drinking, even after she has been
forbidden by her elders, she shall undergo the punishment laid down
later on, in verse 84. For the sin of transgressing what she ought to
observe, she should perform an expiatory rite; but on repetition, she
shall be superseded.

Other grounds for supersession have been laid down as hampering the due
fulfilment of religious rites, begetting of children and other household
duties.

In the case of the *Brāhmaṇa* woman, for whom wine-drinking has been
forbidden by the scriptures, there is to be expiation of the sin of
drinking, if the act is not repeated. She does not become an outcast,
since the grounds for women being outcasts have been
enumerated—‘abortion, and service of low-born men are the grounds for
women becoming outcasts’—(says Gautama, 21.9.) All this we shall explain
under Discourse XI; it has been dealt with under Discourse V also.

‘*False in Conduct*’—whose conduct is not good; for instance, whose
treatment of servants is harsh, who takes her food even before the
religious offerings have been made, who has no faith in rites in honour
of gods and *pitṛs*, or in the feeding of Brāhmṇnas and such religious
acts.

‘*Wasteful*’—who is a spendthrift, and does not take proper care of her
utensils and furniture, and buys them at high prices and so forth.

‘*Mischievous*’—who is inclined to inflict punishments for very small
offences (?), and who is prone to interfere with ordinary daily
expenditure (?).

‘*Supersession*’—*i.e*., marrying of a wife over and above the said
one.—(80)


