+++
title = "095 देवदत्ताम् पतिर्"

+++
What the verse means is that ‘the faithful wife should not be abandoned,
even though she suffer from the defects of being disagreeable or of
harsh speech and so forth’; and the rest of it is merely commendatory.

As for the rule that ‘he shall keep her confined in one room,’ which has
been laid down in regard to the unfaithful wife,—this applies to a case
where there has been a single act of transgression on her part; if the
act is repeated, divorce must follow. Otherwise, there would be no point
in the assertion that ‘he shall always support the *faithful* wife.’

As regards the declaration—‘when a woman has trans gressed, she shall
have all her rights withdrawn, he dressed in dirty clothes and be given
mere subsistence, being allowed to live in a degraded condition, lying
upon the ground’ (*Yājñavalkya*, 170),—this refers to a case where the
husband is willing and able to keep her; if however he is unwilling,
then there must be divorce.

It is going to be laid down later on that food and clothing should be
provided for oven such wives as have become outcasts, and so forth; but
that has to be taken only as prohibiting *banishment* which would be
involved in the starting of a life of living on alms, which forms part
of the expiatory rite consequent upon such heinous sins as the murdering
of a Brāhmaṇa and the like. This we shall explain later on. In any case,
it is not incumbent upon the husband to support a wife who has turned
unfaithful. Nor does the present text prescribe ‘casting off’ which
might be interpreted as ‘avoiding intercourse with her.’

That the wife is a ‘present from the gods’ is implied by such Vedic
texts and declamatory passages as—^(‘)Soma gave her to Gandharva etc.,’
(*Ṛgveda*, 10.85.41).

Or, she may be called ‘a present from the gods’ in the sense that during
the marriage-rite itself, the girl becomes the wife of the gods.

‘*Obtains,—not by his own, wish*.’ So that the wife does not stand on
the same footing as cattle or gold picked up in the market. This is what
is meant by the phrase ‘*not by his own wish*.’

‘*What is agreeable to the gods*.’—When one divorces his wife, who is a
necessary factor in the offering of libations to the Viśvedevas, he is
not in a position to do ‘what is agreeable to the gods.’ Hence, even
though she be hostile, she has to be supported. But in the event of her
becoming an outcast, and hence losing her rights, the husband may
‘supersede’ her.—(95)


