+++
title = "111 एवं सह"

+++
Inasmuch as no man voluntarily incurs any responsibilities regarding the
performance of the *Jyotiṣṭoma* and other sacrifices, which involves the
spending of wealth,—the text proceeds to recommend ‘separation,’ with a
view to the performance of such acts.—‘*Or separately with a view to
spiritual merit*’—This does not mean that, non-separation is sinful; all
that is meant is that Separation is meritorious, just like the
*Agnihotra* and other acts.

“But since non-separation would be an obstacle to the performance of the
meritorious acts, it should he sinful.”

There is no force in this objection. There is sin only when a man omits
to do what it is his duty to do; and one who has not separated from his
brother is not entitled to the performance of the religions acts, for
the simple reason that he has no independent ‘Fire’ of his own; as the
‘Laying of Fire’ has been laid down as to be done at the time of
separation. In the case of the man who has married and laid his Fires
during his father’s life-time, he is at once entitled to the performance
of the religious acts; so that for such a man there is no
‘non-separation.’ But even in this case, if the man happens to lose his
properly, or for some reason does not possess enough wealth to enable
him to perform the religious acts, he would not incur sin, if he lived
with his brothers. Because, as has been already pointed out, neither
‘separation’ by itself, or ‘non-separation’ by itself, is cither
meritorious or sinful.

“It has been declared that ‘for brothers who have not divided their
property a single religious duty is performed,’ which shows that like
husband and wife, the brothers perform their duty conjointly; and this
clearly shows that before separation, their clear duty is that they
should act conjointly, on account of their property being common.”

This cannot be the case with the *Agnihotra* and similar acts. These are
performed in the ‘*Āhavanīya*’ and other consecrated fires; and the
existence of these fires is due to certain consecratory rites. Further,
as the injunction relating to these contains the verb with the
*Ātmanepada* ending, it is clear that the Fires consecrated by one man
cannot be used by another; and further the pouring of oblations in Fires
consecrated by another person is found to be distinctly forbidden—‘one
should not offer sacrifices in Fires belonging to another man.’ Nor is
the performance of the *Agnihotra* and other rites laid down as to be
done in the household Fire kindled according to *Smārta* rites, because
the very term ‘household’ connotes a special qualification; and the tin;
thus qualified could be used for certain specified purposes only; such
for instance as the feeding of guests and other acts laid down as
constituting the ‘great sacrifices;’—in such texts as—‘In the marital
fire should one perform his household-rites, as also the five
sacrifices.’ From this it is clear that in the household-fire one can
perform only the *household-rites*. Consequently when a text says that
‘a single duty is performed,’ it clearly refers to such acts as the
*Śrāddha*, the Charities and so forth.—(111)


