+++
title = "112 ज्येष्ठस्य विंश"

+++
Some people hold the following view—“This rule regarding the *additional
portions* refers to the past, and is not meant to be observed during the
present time; specially because the rules laid down in the *Smṛti*
always bear upon some particular time; and when the rule is put forth as
to be observed, the intention of the author is that the knowledge of
this may bring merit to the learner; just as it is in the case of the
Prolonged Sacrificial Sessions. No one is found nowadays to perform
these Prolonged Sacrificial Sessions, and yet *Brāhmaṇa* texts contain
injunctions of them. It is in view of such acts that it has been
declared that ‘Religious duties for the Kali cycle are different *etc.,
etc*.’ (l85). Thus religious duties are to be understood as restricted
in regard to time also, just as they are in regard to place. As a matter
of fact, no religious act that has been enjoined is performed in all
places; hence it is that they are declared as restricted in regard to
place. If they were meant to be performed at all places, there would be
no such restrictions as—‘This shall be done by the learned twice-born
persons etc, *etc*.’ (9.66). From all this it follows that when rules
regarding *Additional Portions* are put forward, they are not meant to
be observed, their case being analogous to that of *Killing the cow*
(for the *Madhuparka* offering).”

This view is not quite satisfactory. No such restriction regarding
*time* is found laid down anywhere. Restrictions regarding *place* also
that are found pertain only to ‘the ground sloping towards the east’ and
so forth, and never to the ‘Central’ or ‘Eastern’ or other parts of the
country; as has been made clear under 8.41. As regards the Prolonged
Sacrificial Sessions also, it is quite possible even nowadays to preform
them; specially as it has been already shown that in connection with all
this the term ‘year’ stands for the *day*. As for no one being found to
perform these nowadays,—even though its performance has been enjoined as
*necessary*,—that may be due to the fact, either that men are not
possessed of the capacity necessary for their performance, or that they
do not desire the results obtainable from its performance, or that they
do not have sufficient faith. Then, as regards the phrase ‘while Vena
was ruling over his kingdom’ (9.66), which has the appearance of a
restriction regarding *time*, all that it indicates is that the duties
laid down have been performed from very ancient times; and not that they
are restricted in regard to time.

The ‘twentieth part’ for the eldest; *i.e*., the twentieth part of the
entire state shall be deducted and given to the eldest brother. Half of
that—*i.e*., the fortieth part, to the middlemost brother; and to the
youngest brother, the fourth part of that,—*i.e*., the eightieth part.
When all these shares have been taken out, the remainder is to be
divided into three equal parts.

Further, among all the chattels, that which happens to be the best is to
be given to the eldest brother.

Or, the reading may be ‘*dravyeṣvapi param varam*,’ which means that
from among all kinds of things—good, bad and indifferent,—the best of
each kind shall be given to the eldest brother. For instance, if there
are cows or horses, the best of these shall be given to
him—absolutely—and not either in lieu of any other article, or in return
for a price.

This rule regarding *additional portions* is meant only for those cases
where the three brothers are possessed of special qualifications; as it
is only in the case of such men that additional shares are found to be
actually given.—(112)


