+++
title = "118 स्वेभ्यो ऽंशेभ्यस्"

+++
The term ‘*kanyā*’ is, as a rule, used in the sense of the *unmarried
girl*’, as we find in the case where a son is called ‘*kānīna*’ (which
means *born of a kanyā, i.e*., of an unmarried woman). In another
*Smṛti* text, ‘*anūḍhā*’ (‘unmarried’) is the actual word used. From
this it is dear that the share here laid down pertains to the unmarried
girl.

‘*Of the mine caste*.’—Each of the brothers should give to the sister of
the same caste as himself the fourth part of his own share. That is to
say, in a case where the father has left several unmarried girls, the
share allotted *to ouch of them should be the* fourth part of the
portion of the brother belonging to the same caste as himself.

The upshot therefore comes to be this:—Three *parts* of the property
shall be taken by the sons and the fourth part by the daughter.

Some people have held the following view:—Three parts of the property
shall be taken by the sons and the fourth part by the daughter.

Others have held the following view:—“Truly a great benefit is derived
by the daughter from her father:

If the father is alive they have their marriage performed at tremendous
expense, and if he is dead, she obtains a share in the property.”

But the same may be said of the son also. Further, why should there be
such objections against what is distinctly laid down by the words of the
text?

If the idea of the objector is that, according to custom, the only
benefit to which the girl is entitled is that her marriage should be
performed,—then our answer is that the direct assertion of the Smṛti is
infinitely more authoritative than custom. As a matter of fact however,
the custom referred to is by no means universal; so that when it is only
limited in scope, the right course is to adopt the course laid down in
the Smṛti text.

Some people have held the view that—“all that need be given to the girl
is what is necessary for her marriage, and not quite the *fourth part*
as mentioned in the text”

But to such people we address the following remarks:—There is no
restriction upon gifts in connection with marriage, as there is in
connection with the sacrificial fee, which is fixed at¹ twelve hundred.’
The gift in connection with marriage however is not precisely fixed. For
it is said.—‘The father shall marry the girl, clothed and adorned, and
he may also give her a dowry;’ and as ornaments are of various kinds,
made of gold, jewels, pearls, corals and such substances, it cannot be
definitely ascertained how much wealth is to be given on that account,
or what sort of ornament is to be given. So that even for the purpose of
precisely defining what shall be given, it is only right to say that the
brother shall give the fourth part of bis share. Nor does this militate
against either any scriptual injunctions or reason.

This same view is supported by other *Smṛti* texts also: ‘The brothers
who have already had their sacramental rites performed, should perform
the same for the unmarried girls; and sisters should receive from their
brother’s the fourth part of their shore’ (*Yājñavalkya* 2. 124); and
again—‘Until marriage has not been performed, she shall received a
share; after marriage she shall be maintained by her husband.’

What this last text means is as follows:—When the property left for the
brother and the sister is small, and the fourth part of the brother’s
share is not sufficient for the sister’s maintenance,—in such a case the
sister shall enjoy a share equal to her brother’s, until her marriage;
after which she shall receive the fourth part of the share, even though
if be small. And in answer to the question as to how that, would
maintain the girl, the answer is that ‘after marriage she shall be
maintained by her husband.’

The term ‘brother’ in the present text has been explained as standing
for the *uterine brother*. But what is the purpose of adding this
explanation? As a matter of fact, the term ‘brother’ without a prefixed
qualification is always directly applied to the uterine brother. And the
term ‘*severally*’ in the text is also indicative of the same idea.

But in that case the girl that has no uterine brother would have to go
without a share in the property; nor could there be any chance for any
dowry being provided for her. It might be argued that her step-brother
would provide for her. But in the absence of some other text laying down
(such a gift), he may not give it

As a matter of fact however, the term ‘brother’ is found to be applied
to the sons of the same father and several mothers; and it is only to
cousins, maternal and paternal, that the term is applied figuratively.
If this view is accepted, it saves us from the contingency of
attributing several denotations to the single word ‘brother.’

The rule laid down in other Smṛti-texts also supports the allocation of
shares set forth in the present text. We read there as follows—^(‘)What
remains of the ancestral property, after the father’s debts have been
paid off’, shall be divided; other necessary payments also being made
out of it, such for instance as the gift to the unmarried girls; Here we
do not find the words ‘brother’ and^(‘)sister,’ which might give rise to
the doubt (as to the *uterine* or other kinds of brother being meant).

As regards the term ‘*severally*’ (in the text),—it has been added with
a view to guard against the possible interpretation that the fourth part
of the share of a single brother should be divided among all the
sisters.

It might be argued that—“all that this means is that the brothers would
incur sin by not giving out of their shares; and there is nothing to
force them to give it.” Hence it is added—‘*Those not inclined to give
would be outcasts*.’ A man is spoken of as^(‘)taking’ a thing only when
he is its owner, and no one speaks of such a thing as^(‘)to be *given*
to him;’ hence it is that no one speaks of the brothers *giving* to a
brother (both being *owners*); and whenever the word^(‘)giving’ is used,
it is only when the recipient is not the *owner* of the property
concerned.—(118)


