+++
title = "121 उपसर्जनम् प्रधानस्य"

+++
The ‘*Secondary* ’— subsidiary *i.e*., the ‘*kṣetraja*’ son;—‘*to the
primary*’—to the legitimate, ‘body-born,’ ‘*aurasa*’ son,—‘*cannot he
equal*’—this has got to be supplied,—‘*rightly*,’ according to law.
Hence this cannot be right. That is, it is only the ‘*legitimate*’ son
of the elder brother who is entitled to the ‘preferential share,’ which
would have been his father’s; while the son in question, the
‘*kṣetraja*’ is only a ‘*secondary*’ son.

“Therefore h *e should* *be* *treated according to law*.”—The rule of
partition stated before.

“But if the son in question also happens to be the eldest, wherefore
cannot he obtain exactly what would go to the ‘legitimate’ son?”

The reason for this is stated:—‘*In procreation the father* *is t* *he
primary*.’—The term ‘father’ here stands for the actual *progenitor*; he
is the principal factor in the act of begetting the son. The
‘*kṣetraja*’ son, therefore, being begotten by the younger brother, is
*secondary*.

The verse can be explained only by supplying the words ‘is not equal
to.’

This verse is purely declamatory, supplementing the foregoing
prohibition of the ‘preferential share;’ and since it is declamatory, it
may be explained, by attributing any meaning to the terms ‘primary’ and
‘secondary.’

Others read ‘*tasmād dharmeṇa tam tyajet*.’ (‘Therefore one should
rightly abandon him).’

But this is not right; since everywhere the ‘*kṣetraja*’ son has been
declared to be entitled to an equal share with the other sons.

Then again, since this passage is purely declamatory, it could not be
taken as setting forth an optional alternative (to the ‘equal share’
laid down in other texts).—(121)


