+++
title = "131 मातुस् तु"

+++
The term ‘*yautaka*’ is applied to the separate property of a woman; of
which she alone is the sole owner.—Others apply it to only what she
receives at marriage, and not to all that belongs to her; it is only
over the former that she has an absolute right; as it is said that
‘women become their own mistresses, on obtaining presents at their
marriage.’

Others again hold that the term ‘*yautaka*’ applies to the savings that
the young woman makes out of what she receives from her husband for her
clothing and ornaments, and also for the daily household expenses.

‘*Is the share of the unmarried daughter only*.’—Since the text adds the
qualification ‘unmarried,’ it is clear that what is said here does not
apply to one who has been married. Further, the term ‘*eva*,’ ‘only,’
referring to what is well known, sets aside the implications of the
context; consequently, what is said here (regarding the mother’s
property) cannot apply to the ‘appointed daughter’ (who would be
*married*).

*Gautama*—after having declared that the woman’s property descends to
her children’ (28.24)—adds—‘To her daughters who are unmarried and
unsettled;’ where ‘unsettled’ stands for those who, though married, are
childless, and without any property of their own, not having obtained a
footing in the house of their husbands.

‘*The grandson alone is to inherit*’—the entire property of the man who
dies without a legitimate son. What would be the share of the grandson,
when the man dies leaving a legitimate son, shall he declared Inter on.

The term ‘*grandson*’ stands for *the son of the appointed daughter*, in
the present sentence only, not throughout the context; as it is only in
connection with the ‘mother’s separate property’ (mentioned in the first
half of the verse) that there is any authority for rejecting the
implications of the context (which refers to the *Appointed
Daughter*).—(131)


