+++
title = "132 दौहित्रो ह्य्"

+++
That the son of the Appointed Daughter shall inherit the entire property
of the father having been already laid down in the foregoing verse, the
present verse has been explained by some people as laying down the
necessity of ottering the two cakes, with reference to the
said^(‘)daughter’s son.’ And according to these people the reading is
‘*hared yadi*,’ ‘if the son of the Appointed Daughter inherits, etc.,
etc.’

According to this view, the offering of the cakes would he incumbent
only in the event of the man inheriting the entire property; so that he
need not offer the cakes in the event of his receiving an ‘equal share’
(as laid down under 131 below). If this were not the meaning, then there
would be no point in the injunction, if the *offering of cakes*, which
would he already indicated by the general law that ‘one shall make
offerings to him From whom he receives anything.’ And in that ease any
reference to the inheriting of the ‘*entire* property’ would he absolute
purposeless.

This explanation however cannot be right. What is meant is that he
‘shall inherit the property of the sunless father;’ and ‘*aputrasya
pitur haret*’ is the long-accepted reading also. The term^(‘)father’
also is known to apply to the actual *progenitor*, and not to the
*maternal grandfather*. Henee what is meant is that ‘if the husband of
the *appointed daughter* has no son from any other wife, but has one
from the *appointed daughter*, then this same son shall be the son for
his own father, as also for his mother’s father.’ If however, the
progenitor has sons from his other wives, then the son born of the
‘appointed daughter’ shall neither inherit the property of, nor offer
cakes to, him;—even though he may be born of a mother belonging to the
same caste as his father. The relation of the ‘progeny and progenitor’
is different from that of ‘father and son.’ Even though the ‘fathers’ of
‘*Kṣetraja*’ and some oilier kinds of son, are not their ‘progenitors,’
yet they are regarded as having those as their ‘issue’; while the
fathers of the ‘purchased,’ and the ‘abandoned’ sons, even though their
actual ‘progenitors,’ are not regarded as having them as their ‘issue’;
as happened in the case of Ajīgarta and other persons (who sold their
sons to other persons). In the definition of the ‘*Aurasa*’
‘legitimate,’ son (9.166), we find the words ‘in *his own* soil’; and in
the ease of the ‘appointed daughter’ the ‘soil’ belongs to her
father;—her husband being only one who has wedded her and as such, is
entitled to obedience and service.

For these reasons, the conclusion should be as follows:—in a ease where
the husband of the ‘appointed daughter’ has no other sons, the son of
the ‘appointed daughter’ shall inherit his entire property, and also
offer funeral cakes to him. If however the father has sons from other
wives, him the son of the ‘appointed daughter,’ shall not offer cukes to
his father.

Such a son is called ‘*daughter’s son*,’ *i.e*., the son of the
*appointed daughter*. In the case of the grandfather also, the same
principle applies as that in the case of the father;—that is, he shall
otter the cake to him whose property he inherits; and not in any other
case. As a matter of fact, the injunction that ‘ho shall offer the cakes
when he inherits the entire property’ does not necessarily imply that
there should be no offering in other cases. Because there being no
reference to the father and the grandfather, any such implication would
be of the nature of ‘preclusion.’ If there were an implication, oven in
the absence of such a reference, the deduction would be that offerings
should be made to both. Bo that the meaning would be that—‘just as cakes
are offered to the father and the maternal grandfather, so should they
be offered also to the paternal grandfather and the maternal
great-grandfather, the two ancestors above the former two
respectively.—(132)


