+++
title = "135 अपुत्रायाम् मृतायाम्"

+++
So far it would appear that the husband of the Appointed Daughter who
has had no issue, has nothing to do with the property in question; hence
the present text lays down his connection with it.

In this connection there arises the question:—“Does the Appointed
Daughter become ‘sanctified’ by marriage or not? If she *is* sanctified,
then she becomes a *wife*; as ‘marriage’ consists in ‘making a wife.’
And in that case her property naturally reverts to her husband (?). If,
on the other hand, she is *not* sanctified by the marriage,—then, as she
would still continue to be a *maiden*, her husband’s intercourse with
her would he of the nature of having intercourse with an unmarried
maiden, and would he a direct contravention of the rule that one should
always remain attached to his own wife.”

You may take it any way you choose. (?)

“But in that case the present verse becomes meaningless.”

There is no force in this objection. In order to complete the usefulness
of the verse, it should he taken as meant to set aside the notion that
‘just as the child horn of the Appointed Daughter does not belong to her
husband, so would her property also not be inherited by him.’ As a
matter of fact, again, there are several verses in the work of Manu that
are purely declamatory.

Or, (for the sake of argument) it may be said that the Appointed
Daughter is *not* sanctified by Marriage. Even so, intercourse with her
would not mean intercourse with a maiden.—“How so?”—Because all that is
meant is that the child born of her shall belong to its mother’s father;
and any consideration of extraneous matters is entirely out of place (?)
Then again, the act of the husband of the Appointed Daughter is not
among those that make one an ‘outcaste’ (as it would, if it meant
intercourse with a maiden).

Further, is the argument that ‘it moans intercourse with a maiden’ urged
on the understanding that the name ‘maiden’ stands for the *remarried
widow*? As a matter of fact, there are three kinds of ‘maidens’—(l) one
who has had no sexual intercourse with a male, (2) one who has dedicated
herself to lifelong service of temples, and (3) one who is still a
child. Now, if the objector understands the term ‘maiden’ as standing
tor one who has had no sexual intercourse, then, the first intercourse
that the husband has with his married wife would also be ‘intercourse
with a *maiden*.’ In the present treatise, the term ‘*kanyā*,’ ‘maiden,’
is generally used in the sense of ‘one who has had no sexual intercourse
with a male.’

If the term ‘maiden’ be taken to stand for *one for whom the sacraments
have not been performed*,—that cannot he right; as words expressive of
that would he forthcoming at the very outset (?) In fact, it is only on
the strength of other authorities that the term is taken figuratively as
standing for the said person (?) It has been said that—‘all the sacred
texts used at marriage are applicable to maidens only, and never to
non-maidens, because the latter are such as have fallen off from all
religious rites’ (8.226); and the mention of ‘falling off from religious
rites’ is clearly indicative of the fact that the girl who has had
intercourse with man is a ‘non-maiden’; and obviously, she who has not
had such intercourse is a ‘maiden.’ In all these cases the ‘rites’
referred to are those that are done in accordance with the direct
signification of the term ‘maiden.’ Now the question arises whether this
is so in the case of all ‘rites, ‘or only in those in regard to which
there are other authorities? Now, as regards the son called
‘*maiden-born*’ ‘*Kānīna*,’ the very name indicates that the girl is
still under her father and is devoid of the sacramental rite (of
marriage). If the name indicated only *the absence of religions
rites*,—*i* *e*., if the name ‘maiden-horn’ applied to the child not
born of lawful wed-lock,—then the son of the *married* woman also,
begotten by men other than her husband, would he ‘maiden-born.’ On the
other hand, if the name indicated the *ownership of the father* only,
then the daughter of the Appointed Daughter also would come to be called
‘maiden-born’.

It has been said above that intercourse with the ‘maiden’ involves the
transgression of the law that one should have intercourse with his
‘*wife*’ only, lint this law does not mean that, ‘one should not have
intercourse with women other than his wife,’ or that, ‘he should not
love another woman or another wife.’ Because if it meant that, then all
this prohibition being already contained in this law, any separate
prohibition of ‘intercourse with the wives of others’ would he entirely
superfluous. What the said law does mean is that ‘the man shall cherish
love for his wife,’—the cultivating of the feelings of love being
conducive to great happiness. (?) The passage—‘One should not cherish
desire for any woman, nor the wife of another man, as by avoiding this
he falls not off from virtue’—is a mere reiteration. Or, it may only
mean the injunction that ‘while remaining attached to his own wife, one
should avoid intercourse with her on the sacred days.’ Even so, the
injunction would be only supplementary to another. Nor would the case in
question fall within the prohibition of intercourse with ‘*another’s
wife*’; because so long as she has not been married, she cannot, be
called ‘wife.’

Now what is the right course to adopt?

The right course is that the girl (Appointed Daughter) should not be
wedded by any person. There are eight forms of marriage; they have been
styled ‘*Brāhma*’ and the rest, in accordance with the nature of the
manner of acceptance involved in each; and in the case of the Appointed
Daughter, there is no ‘acceptance’ (or *making own*); as in her case,
the ownership of the girl’s father does not cease. Further, the very
prohibition regarding the marrying of a brotherless girl implies that
one should not marry the ‘Appointed Daughter.’ It is said for instance
that—‘one should not marry a brotherless girl, as her son belongs to her
father’ (*Gautama*, 28.20). This prohibition occurs in a special
context; and the trangression of this would make the marriage lose its
true sacramental character; just as the marrying of a *Śūdru* girl by a
Brāhmaṇa deprives his ‘fire’ of the ‘*Āhavanīya*’ (sacrificial)
character.

Mere prohibition however of a certain marriage does not necessarily
deprive it of its sacramental character. In many eases, for instance,
people marry the ‘tawny girl,’ and several such others as are forbidden;
and with the assistance of those wives they do cany on their religious
duties. But if the girl belongs to the same *Gotra* or *Pravara* as her
husband’s, then, even though she has been ‘*married*,’ she cannot
fulfill the duties of the ‘wife’ for him. It is in view of this fact
that in connection with the rule that—‘one should not marry the lawny
girl ete., etc.,’—some people have held that the prohibition, pertains
to the *visible* disabilities, and hence it does not stand on the same
footing as the prohibition of the marrying of a ‘*sapiṇḍa*’ girl; though
both the prohibitions occur in the same context.

“Wherefore then is there any prohibition as to the case of the Appointed
Daughter falling under Marriage?” Because as a supplement to the said
prohibition, there is the assertion ‘because the child belongs to the
father.’

Thus then, it is only in so far as the obtaining of children is
concerned that the Appointed Daughter cannot he one’s ‘wife’; she is
fully entitled to assist as ‘wife’ in all that relates to sacred duties,
property and pleasure.

This may ho so; yet, inasmuch as she cannot become the man’s *own*,
there can be no real *marriage* (which implies *ownership*).

“In that case the son of the Appointed Daughter would be ‘maiden-born.’
Because he would not belong to his progenitor; he being the child of
parents not lawfully wedded, if however, the marriage of the Appointed
Daughter *is* of the nature of a ‘sacrament,’ the child fulfills both
conditions—that of belonging to his progenitor and being born of duly
hallowed wed-lock. And if he fails in only one of those two conditions,
he is still different from the^(‘)maiden-born.’”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—The character of
the^(‘)maiden-born’ son is not present in the son of the Appointed
Daughter.

The definition of the ‘maiden-horn’ is thus stated—‘A son whom a maiden
secretly bears in her father’s house, one should call *maiden-born* by
name; and the child horn of the maiden belongs to the man who marries
her’ (9.172). And the meaning of this is as follows.—‘If a son fulfills
these conditions, he shall he regarded in this treatise as
*maiden-born*; and the question arising as to the person to whom such a
son belongs, the text adds, as an additional sentence, that ‘the child
horn of the maiden belongs to the man who marries her.’ Or, this text
may he taken not as defining the particular kind of son, but simply as
declaring his *relationship*;—the sense being that ‘the maiden-born son
should he regarded as related to the person who marries the girl’; so
that the whole text forms one connected sentence. As a matter of fact,
relationship varies with variations in the persons concerned and the
attendant circumstances,—such for instance, as while the one (the
maiden-born) is begotten *secretly*, the other (that of the Appointed
Daughter) is begotten openly.

Thus the idea that the text quoted supplies the definition of the
‘maiden-born’ son should be regarded as repudiated. It only points out
that the child is^(‘)maiden-born’....(?)

Others however have declared that the *Smṛti* text itself has a special
hearing; the name^(‘)maiden-horn’ is not applied to every child of an
unmarried^(‘)maiden’; it applies only to such a child as has been
defined by Manu.

This view also we accept (??)—(135)


