+++
title = "136 अकृता वा"

+++
By duly considering what has gone before and what follows next, it is
clear that the present verse also refers to the Appointed Daughter.

It has been said that the son of the *unappointed* daughter also is
entitled to the property of his maternal grandfather; how much more so
is the son of the Appointed Daughter entitled to it?—This is the idea
meant to be expressed. The verse cannot he taken as laying down the
title of the grandson to the property of the maternal grandfather; for
if such a general principle were recognised, then there would be no need
for the institution of the ‘appointed daughter’ at all.

“But in another Smṛti text it is found to be laid down that it is
incumbent upon every daughter’s son to offer the cake to his maternal
grandfather:—‘so also on behalf of the mother’s fathers’ (*Yājañvalkya*,
1.228). And in the present verse also, if we ignore the fact of its
occurring in a context dealing with the ‘appointed daughter,’ and bear
in mind the words of the text itself, it appeal’s only reasonable to
take, as pertaining to every daughter’s son, the injunction regarding
‘the offering of cakes and the inheriting of property. In another text
also, it has been declared that ‘the *daughter’s son* shall take the
entire property etc., etc.’ (*Manu*, 9.132).”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—In the text quoted from
Yājñavalkya, we find the term ‘mother’s *fathers*’

in the plural; now does this refer directly to the individual ‘father,’
or indirectly to the ‘mother’s *grandfather*’ and other ancestors? In
the former case, it would mean that the offering is to be made to the
*maternal grandfather* only, just like the ordinary ‘*Śrāddha*’ and
other offerings; and this would be wrong, after the ‘*Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa*’
has been done (which has unified the mother’s father with her
grandfather and great-grandfather); since it has been declared that
‘after the Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa one shall offer cakes to all the three.’ If it
be held that the *Sapiṇḍīkaraṇa* rite itself may not be performed. But
this also could not be; as the performance of it is nowhere forbidden.
As for ‘indirect’ indication, it can be justified only under very
special circumstances; and then too it must be in consonance with the
direct declaration of *Śruti texts*. And it is only in very special
circumstances that a text ean be entirely separated from the context in
which it occurs; as is found to be the case in regard to the ‘Twelve
Upasads.’ (*Mīmāṃsā* Sūtra. 3.3.15-16).

As for the epithet ‘*not appointed*,’ it has been already explained that
it means something quite different.

For all these reasons, the verse must be taken as referring to *the son
of the Appointed Daughter* only.—(136)


