+++
title = "141 उपपन्नो गुणैः"

+++
Under 9.185, it is said—‘Sons, and not brothers or fathers, are the
inheritors of the father’s property’—where all sons are declared to be
entitled to inheritance. So long as the ‘legitimate’ son is alive, the
‘*Kṣetraja*’ and other sons are entitled to maintenance only: ‘The
legitimate son alone is the sole master of the entire paternal property;
for the others he shall, as an act of kindness, provide for
subsistence,’ says Manu (9.163). Thus then the fact of the adopted son
inheriting the lather’s property is already established; the present
text therefore is meant to indicate that he is so entitled, even when
the legitimate son is there. If it did not mean this, there would he no
point in the verse at all.

The question that arises is—what shall he the share of the adopted son?

Some people hold that, since nothing particular has been laid down, the
share shall he equal to that of the legitimate son.

This however is not right. If shares had been meant to be equal, then
this would have been clearly stated, as it has been in the case of the
son of the Appointed Daughter (under 9.134). Hence it follows that, as
in the ease of the *Kṣetraja* son, so here also, the share shall be the
sixth or eighth part (of that of the legitimate son).

In this connection there is something to be said. Just as the author has
declared the share of the *Kṣetraja* son to be ‘the sixth part’ (9.164),
that, of the ‘adopted’ son also would have been prescribed (if it were
so intended).

Thus then, the real purport of the reiteration contained in the present
verse has got to be found out.

Our revered teacher explains as follows:—The idea provided by the
present verse is that, inasmuch as no particular share has been
specified, the slare of the adopted son should be understood to be less
than that of the *Kṣetraja*; and he cannot, go without, a share; nor is
he entitled to a share equal to that of the *legitimate sun*, or to that
of the *Kṣetraja* son.—(141)


