+++
title = "143 अनियुक्तासुतश् चैव"

+++
It has been declared above that, when the husband dies without male
issue, the wife should obtain the sanction of her elders for the
begetting of a son. And this same declaration is reiterated here.

If a woman is ‘*not authorised*’ by her elders, and yet being anxious
for a son, begets one,—under the impression that she being the ‘soil’ of
her husband, the son born of her would be his ‘*Kṣetraja*’ son and thus
entitled to inherit his property,—a son born in this manner shall not
inherit his father’s property; because a son is called ‘*Kṣetraja*’ only
when he is born in the manner expressly laid down in the scriptures; and
it. is only then that he inherits the property of the ‘owner of the
soil’ (his dead father). It is for this reason that the present verse
denies the *inheriting capacity* of the son born of the woman not duly
‘authorised;’ but it does not forbid the offering of the funeral cake;
even though the son is one born of an ‘outcast’ woman.

Narada (13.19 *et. seq*) lays down a special rule—‘Those that are born
from an unauthorised woman, either by one or by several men, are not
entitled to the property of their father; being, as they are, the sons
of the persons from whose seed they have been born;—they shall offer the
cake to the person from whose seed they are born, specially if the
mother has been obtained by 1 he payment of the nuptial foe; if however
the mother has not been obtained by the payment of the fee, they shall
offer the cake to the person who had wedded their mother,’

The text uses the term ‘*suta*,’ ‘*offspring*’ (instead of ‘*putra*’
son), because the child referred to is not born in accordance with the
law relating to the ‘adopted’ and other sons, and is, on that account,
not mentioned among ‘sons.’ Among the twice-born people the issues of
one’s mere ‘seed’ (and not of lawful wedlock) are entitled to mere
subsistence, and not to the inheritance of property; specially as in
connection with all kinds of sons it has been declared that ‘on the
death of their father the sons shall divide among themselves the
property of their father, left over after the performance of the
necessary religious rites; and they are all entitled to maintenance,’
Thus it is the duty of the Legitimate son to provide for the maintenance
of the unlawfully-begotten sons; but these latter are not entitled to
any inheritance in the property; specially because inheritance has been
declared to belong to those particular kinds of sons that have been
specially enumerated: We read (in 9.102) of ‘the *two* heirs’ (whore
only *two* sons are spoken of as ‘heirs’).

From what is said here it follows that ‘the issue of the unauthorised
woman,’ not entitled to the property of his lawful father, does become a
sharer in that of the person from whose seed he is born; and the share
in this case would be just enough for his subsistence.

Then again, as the woman has been obtained at a price, she is a ‘slave,’
and the son ‘slave-born;’ and as such, he is entitled not to a share in
the property, but to mere subsistence.

Others have held that, even though the woman may not be a regular
‘slave’ (in the technical sense), she is a servant all the same, since
the servant is always employed for doing a definite work; *e.g*., the
bath-man, the toilet-man, the cook and so forth; the woman kept for
pleasure also is employed for a definite work,—and is fed and clothed;
and hence she is as good as a servant.

Similarly also in the case of the woman who has already got a son, if
the son is alive, and yet she obtains a son from her younger
brother-in-law, even on ‘authorisation.’

“But how can there be ‘authorisation’ in the ease of a woman who has
already got a son?”

It is the brother-in-law who may be ‘authorised’ for the purposes of
pleasure, under the pretext of begetting a son.

As a matter of fact, both of these are ‘born of an adulterer;’ the one
born of a woman who has already got a son is, in addition, also ‘the
product of lust.’ In the case of the former the action is prompted
entirely by a longing for a son, and not by lust.—(143)


