+++
title = "153 चतुरो ऽंशान्"

+++
Though the shares of the *Kṣatriya* and other sons have been set forth
here in an unqualified form, yet in another *Smṛti*, in connection with
certain particular kinds of property, we find a totally different form
of division:—(1) ‘The land acquired from gifts shall not be given to the
son of the Kṣatriya mother, and (2) if any such land happen to have been
given by the father to these, it shall be taken by the Brāhmaṇa son on
the father’s death.’

Since this specifies the land ‘acquired from gifts,’ that acquired by
purchase and other means do not become similarly excluded. Elsewhere
again we read—‘The son horn to a Brāhmaṇa from his *Śūdra* wife is not
entitled to a share in landed property,’ which precludes the *Śūdra* son
from all kinds of lands.

All this restriction should be understood to apply to those cases where
there are other forms of property also; otherwise, we would be faced by
the law relating to ‘the tenth part of a share.’ If there were no other
property, the sons in question would be left without any subsistence.

What I hold however is that though the allotment of shares (under the
circumstances mentioned in the Smṛti texts quoted) is negatived,
provision for subsistence does not thereby become precluded

If it be asked ‘What is the difference between these two?’—our answer is
that if the said sons were entitled to regular ‘shares,’ they would be
entitled to make gifts of, or sell, the property inherited, while what
they get for subsistence, of that they can only take the usufruct.

“As for the grains necessary for his subsistence, these the *Śūdra* son
shall receive from the *Brāhmaṇa* son; so that there would be no point
in alloting any land to him for that purpose. Says Gautama (28-39)—‘Ho
obtains his subsistence, in the manner of a pupil.”

True; but provision for his subsistence has got to be made, in
consideration of the fact that the property under division is his
father’s; and if such provision were not definitely made at the time of
division, it is just possible that the twice-born brothers might lose
the property, either by misconduct or by some such act as selling and
the like; and in that wise he would be left without subsistence. If, on
the other hand, some land has been definitely allotted for his
subsistence, the other brothers could not appropriate it to other uses,
without his consent.—(153)


