+++
title = "154 यद्य् अपि"

+++
‘*Has a son*’—has any son; or the son meant may be that born of the
*Brāhmaṇa* wife, and not that of any of the^(‘)twice-born’ wives. So
that if there is no son born of the *Brāhmaṇa* wife, even if there
art-sons of *Kṣatriya* and *Vaiśya* wives, the son of the *Śūdra* wife
shall receive the *eighth* part; while if there is only a son of the
*Vaiśya* wife, he shall get the *third* part.

Others, however, explain the phrase ‘no *son*’ to mean *the absence of a
son of any twice-born wife*. And according to this view, the residue of
the property left after the tenth part has been marie over to the
*Śūdra* son shall go to the *Sapiṇḍas* (Collaterals).

The most unobjectionable principle of division, however, would be as
follows:—If the property is a large one, and there is no son of any
higher caste, the *Śūdra* son shall receive only the tenth part; if,
however, the property is just enough for the maintenance of a few men
only, then, the whole shall go to the *Śūdra* son.

In the case of Kṣatriyas and others, another *Smṛti* has laid down the
following rule in connection with sons born of the same and different
castes:—‘Sons of a Kṣatriya are entitled to three, two and one shares;
those of the Vaiśya to two and one’ (Yājña. 2.125). That is, sons of the
*Kṣatriya* from the *Kṣatriya* wife shall each receive three parts,
those from the *Vaiśya* wife two parts, and from the *Śūdra* wife one
part; so that *Śūdra* sons receive the sixth part of the property of the
*Kṣatriya* father and the third part of the *Vaiśya* father.

Others again explain the sense of the present text as follows:—When he
is going to give some property to the *Śūdra* son at all, the father
shall collect the entire property and give to him the tenth part of
it,—even, though he be free to do as he likes; as it is going to be
declared (in the next verse) that ‘whatever his father shall give to
him, that shall be his.’

According to this view, it would be much more reasonable to construe the
text as ‘the man having a son shall give, etc. etc.,’—‘*dadyāt*,’ ‘shall
give,’ being construed with ‘*saputraḥ*,’ ‘having a son’; otherwise, the
construction would be—‘the person, whose father has a son or no son,
shall give, etc.,’—which shall be a most difficult one. As in this case,
the term ‘having a son’ shall stand for the dead *father*, while the
nominative of the verb ‘shall give’ shall be the living son or other
*Sapiṇḍa* relations.

Thus, then, in a case where there are only *Brāhmaṇa* and *Śūdra* sons,
and no *Kṣatriya* or *Vaiśya* ones, the *Śūdra* one is entitled, not to
the tenth part, but to something less, never more.

If there are ten cows, the Brāhmaṇa son shall receive four cows the
Śūdra one cow,—the remaining ones being divided between the *Kṣatriya*
and *Vaiśya* sons. When, however, these latter too do not exist, then,
these five cows also shall he divided, on the aforesaid principle,
between the *Brāhmaṇa* and *Śūdra* sons. When, however, the Brāhmaṇa son
takes the entire property, he cannot be called either a ‘share-holder’
or ‘a receiver of four shares.’ Hence, in this ease what has been said
(in 153) regarding the Brāhmaṇa taking ‘four shares’ would apply to a
case where there are four brothers. The *Śūdra* also receives the ‘tenth
share’ only when there are four brothers;—this share to be
correspondingly increased if there are two or three brothers only.—(154)


