+++
title = "155 ब्राह्मण-क्षत्रिय-विशां शूद्रापुत्रो"

+++
The son born of the *Śūdra* wife of the twice-born persons is not
an^(‘)inheritor of property.’—Is that so always?—No; ‘*whatever* *his*
*father may give to him*’—*i.e*., the ‘tenth part’ which the father may
have allotted to him—that shall be his property; and he obtains nothing
more out of his paternal property.

In this connection, it has been declared by Śaṅkha—‘The son of the Śūdra
wife is not entitled to inheritance;—his share consists of whatever his
father gives him; *at the time of partition, however, his brothers may
give him a pair of bullocks in addition*’;—this latter sentence forming
a subsequent addition.

Others hold that what is said in the present text refers to the son of
the *unmarried Śūdra* woman;—their argument being that there is nothing
in the text indicative of the woman being one that has been duly
married,—all that the term ‘*Śūdra*’ denotes is the particular caste.
Hence, the meaning is that for the son of such a woman, ‘*whatever the
father gives him*,’—that is, the provision that his father makes for his
maintenance, or any share that he may have allotted to him for his
maintenance during his life-time,—that shall be his property,—and his
brothers need not give him anything. Says Gautama in the section dealing
with the son of a *Śūdra* wife—‘As regards the sons of unmarried wives,
they shall, if they are obedient, receive enough for subsistence, in the
manner of pupils.’ (28—39)

According to the view of these men, however, the sons born of unmarried
*Kṣatriya* and *Vaiśya* wives would be entitled to inheritance; and it
is not known to what share these would be entitled.

It might be asserted that—“Their share shall be the same as that of the
sons of married wives; since there is no word, either directly or
indirectly indicative of the fact that the mothers shall be *married*
wives. For all that is said is that—‘the legitimate son alone shall
inherit the property’ (163); which distinctly mentions the ‘legitimate’
son, born of the legally married wife *↓* and the qualities of the
‘legitimate’ son can never be present in those born of *unmarried*
wives, and further, it has been declared that ‘the son of the
unauthorised woman...... is not entitled to any share’ (143). It might
be urged that this last passage refers to the *brothers wife*; as it is
only in connection with her that ‘authorisation’ has been sanctioned; so
that when the text used the term ‘unauthorised’ it must be taken as
referring to her alone.”

But in the present case also, there is dear indication of the fact that
sons become entitled to ‘subsistence’ as soon as they are born
(irrespectively of all other conditions). Hence, the term ‘unauthorised’
also refers in general to the wives of other persons. And all these sons
(of married or unmarried wives) are entitled to subsistence.—(155)


