+++
title = "156 सम-वर्णासु वा"

+++
In the absence of any other alternative, (he term ‘or’ can be explained
only as referring to what is here stated.

Whether the wives belong to the same caste or to different castes, it is
only the *Śūdra* son that has been precluded from inheriting the entire
property; hence, what is asserted here must be understood to apply to
*twice-born* sons only. Consequently, the sense is that if a *Brāhmaṇa*
has no son born of his *Brāhmaṇa* wife, his sons horn of the other
wives, inherit his entire property. Similarly, the son of the *Vaiśya*
wife of the Kṣatriya father.

The text cannot mean that ‘after the preferential share has been given
to the eldest brother, all the sons born of wives of different castes
shall divide *equally*,—with those born of the wives of the same caste.’
As this would he contrary to what has been said before (in 153)
regarding each son of the lower caste receiving one share less than that
of the higher caste.

It has been argued that—“This equality would be right in a case where
the sons of the wife of the same caste are devoid of qualities, while
those of the lower castes are duly qualified; specially in view of what
has been declared by Gautama (28.40)—according to same people, a son of
the wife of the same caste does not inherit, if he is misbehaved.”

This, however, is not right. Because, the caste of the son is the most
important consideration. In fact, the revered teachers have declared
that as soon as the son (of the wife of the same caste) has been born,
he becomes the owner of the entire property.

Thus, the rule on this subject should be as that when there are no sons
of the wife of the same caste, oven those sons that are born of wives of
different, castes should give to the eldest brother of the same caste as
themselves, his preferential share and divide the rest equally.—(156)


