+++
title = "162 यद्य् एकरिक्थिनौ"

+++
An impotent man having obtained a son from his ‘authorised’ wife through
another man, according to the method described under 167, may happen to
have his impotence cured by medicines and then himself beget his own
‘legitimate,’ ‘body-born’ son; and in this ease, the former son would
receive the property of his *progenitor*, who may be called his ‘father’
on the ground of his being the cause of his birth; and on the same
ground the child would be called his ‘son’ only figuratively; since in
reality he is the ‘*Kṣetraja*’ son of the other man, just as he is
referred to in this verse.

If, however, the progenitor happens to have a ‘legitimate’ son of his
own,—and if the father, moved by his great love, does not happen to have
made over all his property to that son,—and further, if there are no
other Sapiṇḍa relations—under such circumstances, the ‘*Kṣetraja*;’ son
may inherit the property of that progenitor. The sons of ‘unauthorised’
women also inherit the property of their progenitor, if there are no
‘Sapiṇḍa’ relations.

Others explain the verse to mean as follows:—While the rightful ‘heir’
is already there, if a ‘*Kṣetraja*’ son happen also to be bora, this
latter shall inherit the property of his progenitor, and not that of the
‘owner of the soil’ (his mother’s husband),—if there is a ‘legitimate’
son of the latter. In the presence of the legitimate son, what the share
of the ‘*Kṣetraja*’ son shall be is laid down in verses 165 and 164.

The next two verses show how the two sons become entitled to the same
property.—(162)


