+++
title = "166 स्वक्षेत्रे संस्कृतायाम्"

+++
The term ‘*own*’ here denotes *ownership*, and not *the character of
belonging to the same caste*. Thus, the meaning is that the ‘body-born’
son is one born from the woman ‘*sanctified*’ (married) by the man
himself. If this were not meant by ‘own,’ then the epithet
‘*sanctified*’ would only exclude the *unmarried* woman; so that the son
begotten on a woman *married* by another person would also come to be
known as one’s ‘body-born’ son. And further, if the word is interpreted
as we have pointed out, the sons of the *Kṣatriya* wife also would be
‘body-born’ (for the Brāhmaṇa father); these latter do not fall within
any other class of sons.’ Others take the epithet ‘*prathamakalpitam*’
as qualifying ‘body-born’ \[and meaning ‘of the principal kind’\], and
hold that the sons born of the *Kṣatriya* wife are not ‘body-born’ in
the fuller sense.

Under this explanation, however, as the son begotten on one’s own
*married* wife would not be ‘body-born’ in the full sense, he would be
as good as born of an *unmarried* wife And even if the sons of the
*Kṣatriya* and other wives are not called ‘body-born,’ what does it
matter? They still remain the man’s ‘sons’ and entitled to inherit their
limited shares in his property.

The following argument might be put forward—“If the son in question does
not fulfill the conditions of the ‘body-born,’ the ‘soil-born,’ or any
of the twelve kinds of sons,—and there are only these *twelve* kinds of
sons,—how can he be regarded as a ‘son’ at all?”

The answer to this is as follows:—What is the use of any definitions?
The application of the same depends upon actual usage. As a rule, when a
child is born of a man, he is called his ‘son’; and obviously, if the
child is not born of a man, they do not regard that man to be his
‘father’; and they tell him—‘this is not your father, you are not born
of him.’ From these two affirmative and negative propositions, it
follows that the progenitor is the ‘father’ and the person born is the
‘son;’ and it is only for the purpose of indicating the peculiar
characteristics that definitions are set forth. In the case of the
‘soil-born’ son, it is true that the person called his ‘father’ is not
his progenitor; but that is only with a view to a special purpose; the
child being called the man’s ‘son,’ for, even though not his ‘son,’ he
fulfills for him the functions of a son.

As a matter of fact, the mere fact of a person being born of a man does
not make him his ‘son’; as this has been expressly denied. It is for
this reason that such sons have been called ‘substitutes’ (in 180).
Further, if the mere fact of being born of a man were to make one his
‘son,’ then there would be no difference in the ‘sonship’ of the
‘body-born son,’ ‘the son born of a remarried woman’ and ‘the son of an
unauthorized woman,’ since the fact of being born is common to all of
them. Then again, if the mere fact of *serving the purposes of a son*
were the sole condition of one being a ‘son,’ then no one in the world
would be ‘sonless.’ As regards the common usage (regarding the use of
the name ‘son’) mentioned above, it cannot he regarded as universally
true, since it is found that in many cases the name ‘father’ is not
applied to the actual *progenitor*.

Thus then, notwithstanding ordinary usage, the actual application of the
name ‘son’—as in the case of such titles as ‘wife’ and the like—should
be determined by the scriptural texts, which lay down the various ways
in which a ‘son’ may he begotten; and it is only the signification of
the names that may be learnt from ordinary usage; just as in the ease of
such titles as ‘Indra’ and the like.

“But as regards the declaration that the ‘body-born’ son is ‘*the first
in order*,’ it is ordinary usage on which this is based.”

Not only on ordinary usage, but also upon the nature of the benefits
(conferred by this particular kind of son);—the meaning of the
declaration being that ‘the body-born son is in a position to confer the
greatest benefits upon his fathers.’ Thus, the other sons are called
‘substitutes’ only on the ground of the lessening degrees of benefits
conferred by them. As a matter of fact, however, these other sons cannot
be ‘substitutes’ in the real sense of the term; because, it is only when
a substance is used as a subsidiary accessory in the completing of an
act already begun with a certain substance (which is no longer
found)—that the former substance comes to be called a ‘substitute;’ in
the case in question however, the son is not the ‘subsidiary accessory’
of any act, the act of begetting the son being itself only a subsidiary
act Hence, what is meant by calling the other sons, ‘substitutes’ is
that though the ‘soil-born’ and others are also ‘sons,’ it is the
‘body-born’ one that is most praiseworthy; just as we find in the Vedic
passage—‘The cow and the horse are the only cattle, animals other than
the cow and the horse are not *cattle*,’—where the assertion that the
other animals are not ‘cattle’ means that the cow and the ‘horse are
praiseworthy.

Further, it has been shown in the *Mahābhārata* that sons do not always
belong to the person from whose seed they are born: *e.g*., Pāṇḍu,
Dhṛtarāṣṭra and Vidura, though born from the seed of Vyāsa, are not
spoken of as ‘sons’ of Vyāsa.

It has already been explained by us what useful purpose is served by our
regarding as ‘body-bom’ or ‘legitimate,’ the sons of the *Kṣatriya* and
other wives also.

“As regards the ‘son of the Appointed Daughter,’ if this were regarded
as a ‘son,’ the number of sons would exceed *twelve*.”

What is the harm if it does? This may be the *thirteenth* kind of son.
In fact, he has not been separately mentioned, because, the useful
purpose served by him is the same as that by the ‘body-born’ son, which
fact makes him equal to this latter. That is why another Smṛti text has
declared—‘Equal to him (the Body-born son) is the son of the Appointed
Daughter.’ (*Yājñavalkya*, 2.128).—(166)


