+++
title = "203 यद्य् अर्थिता"

+++
‘*Longing*’—desire to meet, with a view to sexual intercourse. When
there is such longing, the man shall marry. And if there is issue from
the marriage, the ‘*child*’—whether a son or a daughter —‘*is entitled
to inheritance*’—to. a share in the property.

The share to which a daughter is entitled has already been explained.

“In the case of the eunuch of the ‘airy’ (infructuous) ‘semen,’ the
desire for sexual intercourse is there; but, how could he have any
‘issue’?”

It has already been declared above (167) that—‘if a son is born to the
wife of a dead man, a eunuch, an invalid, etc.’ (which shows that such
men can have a ‘soil-born’ son, and this is possible only if they have
wives).

Or, the verse may be taken as indicating that in the case of such men,
marriage could only he prompted by lust. If marriage wore prompted
entirely by religious motives, how could there be any marriage for the
men mentioned, being as they are not entitled to the performance of any
religious rites? Then again, the person born blind, the lame, and the
eunuch of the ‘airy semen,’ have been declared to be fit for the
Initiatory Ceremony; the lunatics and others of that kind however are
not fit for that ceremony; how then can there be any marriage in the
ease of those latter?

‘*And the rest*’—stands for only those already mentioned above (*i.e*.,
the *invalid*, etc); but if the phrase ‘*and the rest*’ were taken as
including *all*, then the ‘*outcast*’ also would become included, which,
bring contrary to Law, would be undesirable.

Or, the present rule may be taken as referring to the case where the man
becomes *insane* or otherwise disabled, after he has been ‘initiated’
and ‘married.’

“But the clause ‘*if they happen to have, longing for a wife*’—could not
apply to the ease of those who are already married.”

Not so; ‘longing for a wife’ (which has been explained as meaning
*desire for sexual intercourse*) is quite possible in the case of
married men.

The older writers have found in the present rule something that is
usefully applicable to the case of also such marriages as are contracted
for purely religious purpose?. So that for the eunuch also,—who is
entitled to the performance of such rites as are prescribed by
*Smṛtis*—it is only right that there be marriage, even in the absence of
sexual desire. As for the rites prescribed in *Śrutis*, it is only one
who has already got a son that is entitled to the ‘laying of fire’
(which is a necessary accompaniment for those rites); so that the eunuch
can never be entitled to them. And it has been already explained what
really prompts the marriage in such cases.—(203)


