+++
title = "209 पैतृकन् तु"

+++
If in addition to what he has inherited, the father recovers such
ancestral property as had become lost, he shall not, unless he wishes
it, share it with his sons, even after these latter have attained their
majority.

“But what would he the occasion for partition among sons while the
father is still alive?”

The answer to this is that such an occasion would arise when the father
himself proceeds to make the division among his sons. This is what has
been thus declared (by *Gautama*, 28.2)—‘When their mother has ceased to
menstruate, and when the father, though living, desires it, the sons
shall divide the property’;—and again ‘When the father has ceased to
have any longings, and when he has ceased to have intercourse with his
wife’ (*Nārada* 13.3).

As a matter of fact, if there were no such restrictions, the son would
become entitled to their grandfather’s property as soon as they were
born; as it has been declared that—‘over the property movable or
immovable, that has been left by the grandfather, both the father and
the son have the same right.’ Having this right, all the sons are
entitled to equal shares in their grandfather’s property; since *shares*
only follow the *right*.

The father, after the birth of his son, shall not invest his ancestral
property in mortgages or purchases; but using it for the proper
maintenance of his family however has been permitted. In actual
practice, even though, under the circumstances, the sons have a right
over the ancestral property, yet from the deprecatory assertion—‘the
sone (son/one?) who divide the property against their father’s wish are
to be deprecated’—it follows that the sons who force the partition on
their father incur a sin. Such as even though one may acquire property
by receiving constant gifts, yet the act of acquiring such property is
blameworthy. Similarly, even though the property (thus shared with the
unwilling father) is the hereditary property of the sons, yet it is open
to censure. For this reason, so long as they have any other means, the
sons should never ask their father for a partition; as such asking would
be immoral.

As a matter of fact, even in the case of the father’s self-acquired
property, he himself divides it among his sons as soon as they have
attained their majority and he finds them duly qualified. It has also
been declared that—‘when the father has reached old age, he shall
himself divide the property among his sons, allotting to the eldest a
preferential share, and equal shares to the rest,’ (*Nārada*, 13.4).
This, however, does not apply to the property that may have boon left by
the grandfather; because, out of that, the father has no power to allot
any ‘preferential share’—the right of both parties over it being equal.

As for the declaration—‘unequal division has been declared to be legal,
when made by the father’ (*Yājñavalkya*, 2.116),—this has been taken to
apply to a certain extent to the grandfather’s property also. In a case
where there are no two full shares, there would be an exception, in the
case of self-acquired property. (?)—(209)


