+++
title = "212 सोदर्या विभजेरंस्"

+++
The property shall be taken by those ‘*uterine brothers*’ who may have
been ‘*united*’ with him in property;—also ‘*consanguineous*
*sisters*’—*i.e*., those that are unmarried; it is only these that are
called ‘*consanguineous, sanābhi*’ (which is the term used in the text);
those that are married go over to the ‘family’ of their husbands, and
hence no longer remain ‘consanguineous’ to their brothers.

‘*And those brothers that are united*’.—The particle ‘*ca*,’ ‘and,’
includes the ‘sisters’ also.

This should not he taken to mean that the property shall be taken ‘by
the uterine brothers, and also *by such brothers as may be united*.’ As
in that case those others also who are *not uterine*, but *united*,
would be entitled to a share in the property. Among the *uterine*
brothers, there may he some that are *united* and others that are *not
united*; and where there are *uterine* brothers, united and not united,
it is these that would divide the property among themselves.

Nor would this militate against the following text—‘A brother born of
another mother, even though united, shall not take the property of his
half-brother; while a uterine brother, even though not united, shall
take it, but not the brother born of a different mother.’
(*Yājñavalkya*, 2.139). The meaning of this is as follows:—‘Even though
united, the half-brother does not receive the property, if a uterine
brother is there, even though not united; while among the uterine
brothers, he alone shall receive it who is *united*, and not any other,
notwithstanding his uterine character.’ This is what has been declared
in the text—‘Of one who is united with another brother, this united
brother shall receive the property; and the uterine brother that of
another uterine brother.’ (*Yajñāvalkya*, 2.138). When, however, there
are no *uterine* brothers at all, then the property shall be taken by
such half-brothers as may be united, and none others. Among uterine
brothers, even when separated, there is always some sort of ‘proximity,’
due to their living near one another; so that the function of the
*uterine* brother would, in a general way, be accomplished by even those
that may have separated. Hence it is that, among such uterine brothers
also as may have separated, if one dies, his property shall go to the
other uterine brother, whose share in the property can never totally
disappear.

It would not be right to argue against this that—“at the time in
question the share of the separated brother can never come up at all,
and hence there is nothing that would disappear or not disappear.” Since
it has been declared that ‘the son becomes the owner of the property as
soon as he is born’ (so that the ownership of all brothers over the
ancestral property is innate in them);—but so long as the parents are
alive, they have no mastery over it’ (9.104); which shows that all the
sons acquire ownership immediately after the father’s death.—(212)


