+++
title = "253 रक्षनाद् आर्यवृत्तानाम्"

+++
What has been indicated in the foregoing verse is now explained.

‘*The well-behaved*’—those whose behaviour is right,—*i.e*., consists in
doing what is sanctioned by the Scriptures and avoiding what is
forbidden by them. The compound belongs to the
‘*madhyamapadalopi*’—ellyptical—class. Thus are included all Vedic
Scholars and the poor and destitute, who pay no taxes. So that by
extending his protection over these men, it is only right that the king
should go to heaven. In the case of other people, since the right of
protection is purchased by the payment of taxes, the king incurs sin by
neglecting it; as is going to be declared in the next verse ‘he falls
off from heaven’. By repaying with protection what he receives in the
form of taxes, the king is only saved from sin, and he does not obtain
heaven.

Or the declaration regarding heaven may be based upon the due fulfilment
of his duties, as already mentioned above.

Others have held the following opinion:—The declaration regarding the
king going to heaven is purely declamatory. In fact the protecting of
those who pay no taxes is also included in the king’s ‘functions’, since
those people also form part of his ‘*kingdom*’, the protecting whereof
forms the chief function of the king.

\[So that for doing this also there can be no reward in the shape of
Heaven\]. Just as artisans, who ply their trade for a living, work for
the king for one day during the month;—when they are made by the king to
do his work,in lieu of his taxes; in the same manner the king also, who
carries on his work for a living and engages himself in protecting the
people, is made by the Scriptures to protect the well-behaved people, as
an obligatory duty. Again the man who has laid the fires, prompted by
the declaration of rewards, engages himself in obligatory rites, but not
with a view to obtaining Heaven or any such rewards,—for the simple
reason that such rites have not been prescribed as bringing about
rewards; and yet they are duly performed. Exactly similar would be the
case with the King’s action in protecting his whole Kingdom.

Thus all the declarations of rewards that there are, are to be regarded
as purely declamatory;—as has been declared by Viṣṇusvāmin (?)—(253)


