+++
title = "294 स्वाम्य्-अमात्यौ पुरम्"

+++
The ‘Removal of Thorns’ having been dealt with, the author now proceeds
to describe such duties of the king as bear entirely upon the
administration of the kingdom. If the administration is carried on in
this manner, the kingdom is safe: so also there is safety in the kingdom
if law-suits are justly disposed of and thorns are effectively removed.
Then again, in most cases the ‘thorns’—*i.e*., the worst
criminals—consist of persons attached to the Queen or to the Princes, to
the king’s favourities or to the commanders of armies and so forth; and
it is possible that the king may not remove this, being guided by some
such notion as—‘In the event of a dangerous upheaval among the people I
shall have great need for the army-commander, or for the tributary
chief,—why should I punish him, simply for some offence against the
people?’—and it is in view of this that the author is proceeding with
the subjects of the ‘constituents’ of the kingdom. And from what
follows, it is clear that the *People* stand on the same footing as the
*King* himself,—being as much a ‘constituent’ of the kingdom as the
latter; though there may be some difference in the degree of their
relative importance. For instance, if there is disurbance among the
people due to some act of the *Minister*, this should be suppressed;
because the people are of greater importance than the *Minister*; or,
the king may desist from hasty action, and try to find out the^(‘)thorn’
and remove him. it is for this reason that portions of the teachings
contained in Discourse VII ate extracted and set forth in the present
connection.

‘*Master*’—*i.e*. the King himself.

‘*Minister*’—the Councillor, the Priest, the Army-Commander.

‘*Capital City*’—the city containing the king’s residence.

‘*People*’—the public.

‘*Treasury*’—store of gold and silver and other valuables.

^(‘)*Army*’—consisting of elephants, horses and foot-soldiers.

^(‘)*Ally*’—one having the same end in view: as has been
described^(‘)next to him comes the Ally.’

These are the ‘*constituents*’—causes, components—of the kingdom; in the
same manner as the potsherds are of the jar.

Or the term ‘*prakṛti*’ may he taken as standing for
‘*svabhāva*,’^(‘)nature;’ the sense in that case would be that the
kingdom *is of the nature* of these.

It is these seven that have been divided into seventy-two parts, the
details of which have been already described.—(294)


