+++
title = "001 विद्वद्भिः सेवितः"

+++
‘*Hṛdayenābhyanujñātaḥ*’—The term ‘*hṛdaya*’ stands for the
*heart*—conscience. The phrase stands for what is spoken of later on, in
verse 6 below, as ‘*ātmanastuṣṭih*’ Medhātithi has suggested that
‘*hṛdaya*’ may stand for the Veda.

*Medhātithi* (p. 48. l. 15). ‘*Mīmāṃsātaḥ*’—This refers to Mīmāṃsāta
Sūtra I. i—2 ‘*Chodanālakṣaṇo'artho dharmaḥ*.’

This verse has been quoted in the *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 80), in
corroboration of the definition of *Dharma* provided by Viśvāmitra, that
‘*Dharma* is that which when done is praised by good men learned in the
scriptures.’ From this it follows that according to this writer
‘*hṛdayenāvhyanujñātaḥ*’ means the samething as ‘*Yam āryāḥ
praśaṃsanti*’ in Viśvāmitra’s definition.—It is quoted in Hemādri
(Vrata, p. 10), which explains *hṛdayenābhyanujñātaḥ* as ‘which is
definitely known in the mind, for certain,’ find ‘*adveṣarāgibhiḥ*’ as
‘persons free from improper love and hate—in the *Vīramitrodaya*
(*Paribhāṣā*, p. 80), which adds the following notes—This verse supplies
a definition of *Dharma* in general. ‘*Vidvadbhiḥ*’ those conversant
with what is contained in the Veda;—‘*Sadbhiḥ*,’ those who have the
right knowledge of things;—these two qualifications are meant to
indicate that ‘Dharma’ is rightly known by means of the
Veda;—‘*adveṣarāgibhiḥ*,’ free from such love and hate as are conducive
to evil this is meant to indicate that *Dharma* is that which is not
conducive to any undesirable effects; —‘ *hṛdayenabhyanujñātaḥ*
indicates that Dharma is conducive to all that is good; as it is only
the good to which men’s minds are attracted:—thus then the complete
definition of Dharma, as indicated by the text, is that it is that
which, not being conducive to any evil effects, is known through the
Veda as conducive to good. The three qualifications serve the purpose of
excluding such acts as the performance of the *Śyena sacrifice*.—This
definition of ‘Dharma,’ ‘Right,’ also implies that of ‘*Adharma*,’
‘Wrong,’ as that which is known through the Veda as conducive to evil.’

This is quoted in the *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 13); and in the
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 156).


