+++
title = "006 वेदो ऽखिलो"

+++
*Cf*. Āpastamba, 1.1.11.1—3; Gautama, 1.1—4 and 28. 48; Vaśiṣṭha, 1.
4—6; Baudhāyana, 1.1.1.1—6; Yājñavalkya, 1.7.

The meaning of ‘*Śīla*’ and ‘*Ācāra*’ separately has been the source of
much misunderstanding. The difficulty has been solved by Medhātithi
taking the term ‘*Smṛtiśīle*, as standing, not for ‘Smṛti’ *and*
‘Śīla,’but for ‘Smṛti’ *as qualified by* ‘Śīla,’ this being ‘freedom
from hatred and attachment;’ ‘*Smṛti—Śīla*’ stands for that ‘Smṛti,’
recollection, which the learned have when their mind is calm and
collected, not perturbed by passions of any kind. The reason suggested
by Buhler is not satisfactory.

Kullūka has explained ‘*Śīla*’ as standing for the virtues enumerated by
Hārīta—‘Brāhmaṇa-like behaviour, devotion to gods and Pitṛs, gentility,
kindness, freedom from jealousy, sympathy, absence of cruelty,
friendliness, agreeable speech, gratefulness, being prepared to grant
shelter, mercy, and calmness.’ Nārāyaṇa puts it vaguely as ‘that to
which learned men are prone.’

‘*Self-satisfaction*’—This is meant to apply to cases where the
scriptures provide options (Medhātithi, Govindarāja and Kullūka);—or to
cases not covered by any of the aforesaid sources (Nārāyaṇa and
Nandana).

In connection with this verse, the student desirous of carrying on
further investigation, is advised to read Kumārila’s Tantravārtika,
Adhyāya I (Translation—*Bibliotheca Indica*).

*Medhātithi* (p. 57, l. 8)—‘*Viśvajitā*’—See Mīmāṃsā Sūtra 4.3.15—10.

*Medhātithi* (p. 57, l. 20)—‘*Kvachidarthavādādeva*’—for an example, see
Mīmāṃsā Sūtra 1.4.29.

*Medhātithi* (p. 60, l. 29)—‘*Kartṛsāmānyāt*’—This refers to Mīmāṃsā
Sūtra 1.3.2.

*Medhātithi* (p. 62, l. 2) — ‘*Yathā āghāre devatāvidhiḥ*—Śabara on
Mīmāṃsā Sūtra 2.2.10 says—

> *\[ādhāre\] māntravarṇako devatāvidhiḥ* \| *ita indra ūrdhvo'dhvaro
> divi...indravāna svāhesyādhāramādhārayati—ityevamasāvādhāro
> yadyasyendro devatā*

*Medhātithi* (p. 60, ll. 7-8) ‘*Tulye śrautatve*’—Though in regarding
both the Śruti-rule and the Smṛti-rule to be equally ‘Śrauta,’
‘Vedic’—Medhātithi apparently accepts the view of Kümārila as against
Śabara (according to whom’ the Smṛti-rule is not *Śruti*, but stands on
a distinctly inferior footing),—ultimately his view comes to be the same
as Śabara’s—*viz*., that in case of conflict between *Śruti* and
*Smṛti*, the latter is set aside in favour of the former; while
according to Kumārila, there is option.

*Medhātithi* (p. 63, l. 1)—‘*Viśvajityodhikāravat*’—See Mīmāṃsā Sūtra
6.7.18—19. In connection with the Viśvajit sacrifice we have the
text—‘one should give away his *entire property*, *sarvasva*.’ The
conclusion is that the injunction of the giving away of one’s entire
property having been already found in connection with the
*Jyotiṣṭoma*,—at which one is bound to pay as fee either 1,200 gold
pieces or his entire property,—what the mention of the giving of entire
property at the *Viśvajit* means is that at this latter sacrifice, the
fee must consist of the *entire property*, and not of 1,200 gold pieces;
and this has been taken to imply that the man who seeks to perform the
*Viśvajit* must possess more than 1,200 gold pieces.

*Medhātithi* (p. 64, 1. 4)—‘*Indriyāṇām &c*’—The first part of this
quotation occurs in Manu 7. 44; but the second half is from some other
work.

This verse has been quoted in the *Vidhānapārijāta* (vol. II, p. 511) in
support of the authority of *Sadāchāra*, as bearing upon the propriety
of *tasamudrādhāraṇa*;—also in the *Smṛtikaumudī* (p. 1) which remarks
that the Practice of cultured men is authoritative only when it is not
repugnant to Śruti and Smṛti.

The *Aparārka* (p. 82) quotes the verse in support of the view that the
Practices of Good Men also, as distinct from the Smṛti, are an
authoritative source of our knowledge of Dharma. It is interesting to
note that it reads *vedavitsmṛtiśīlatā* in place of *ātmanastuṣṭireva
ca*.

It is quoted in the *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 5), which adds the
following explanation:—

Veda is the means of knowing Dharma; so also are the ‘Smṛti’ and
‘Śīla’—*i.e*. freedom from love and hate,—of persons learned in the
Veda;—‘*āchāra*’ such as the tying of the bracelet and so forth;—and
‘*ātmatuṣṭi*’, *i. e*., when there are several options open to us, it is
our own satisfaction that should determine the choice of one of
them;—also in the *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 17b);—and in *Hemādri*
(Vrata, p. 17).

This is quoted in the *Vīramitrodaya* (Paribhāṣa, p. 10), which adds the
following notes:—

‘Vedaḥ’ is the collection of Mantra and Brāhmaṇa texts, as defined by
Āpastamba;—‘*akhilaḥ*’, the actual texts available, as also those
presumed on the strength of ‘transference’ and that of ‘Indicative
Power’, ‘Syntactical Connection’, ‘Contest’, ‘Position’ and ‘Name’
(Jaimini iii);—or ‘*akhilaḥ*,’ ‘entire,’ may be taken as meant to
preclude the notion that the said authority belongs only to the three
Vedas, and *not* to the Atharva’, which is based upon such assertions of
Āpastamba and others as ‘Yajña is enjoined by the *three* Vedas’. That
the ‘Atharva is an authority for Dharma is due to the fact that it
prescribes the performance of the *Tulāpuruṣa* and other propitiatory
rites for all castes, even though it does not deal mainly with the
performance of the Agnihotra or other *Śrauta* rites.—When the text says
that these are the means of knowing ‘*Dharma*’ *Right*, it implies that
they are the means of knowing also what is ‘*Adharma*,’ ‘*wrong*’ it
being necessary for the scriptures to furnish an idea of all that is
*wrong* and hence a source of impurity of the mind, which obstructs the
acquiring of true knowledge.—‘*Mūlam*’, ‘Source’, the means of
knowing;—‘*Todvidām*’, those learned in the Veda; this implies that in
the case of ‘*Smṛti*’ and the rest, tḥe authority is not inherent in
themselves, but due to their being based upon the Veda—

‘*Smṛti*’ the *Dharmaśāstra* compiled by Yājñavalkya and
others.—‘*Śīla*’ implies the thirteen qualities enumerated by
Hārīta—*viz*., Faith in Brahman, Devotion to Gods and Pitṛs, Gentility,
Harmlessness, Freedom from jealousy, Freedom from harshness,
Friendliness, Sweetness of speech, Gratefulness, Kindness for sufferers,
Sympathy, Calmness. This ‘*Śīla*’ differs from ‘Ācāra’; it stands for
the negative virtues, the *avoidance of wrong*, while the former stands
for the positive active virtues; the doing of right.—‘*Ācāra*’, the
tying of the bracelet during marriage and so forth.—‘*Sādhūnam
atmanastuṣṭiḥ*’, whenever doubt arises regarding what is right, what
determines the question is the ‘self-satisfaction’ of those that are
‘*Sādhu’ i. e*., have their minds replete with the knowledge of the Veda
and the impressions gathered therefrom; *i*. *e*., that course is to be
accepted as ‘light’, which commands the unanimous approval of the said
persons;—such is the explanation suggested by the *Kalpataru*. In
support of this view we have the following passage from the
*Taittirīya*, relating to cases of doubt regarding Dharma,—‘Thou
shouldst behave in that manner in which behave those Brāhmaṇas who are
impartial, honest, steady, calm and righteous.’ This implies the
authority of the *Pariṣat* ‘Assembly’.—Or ‘*sādhūnām*’ may be construed
with ‘*āchāraḥ*’, which would imply the authority also of those ‘good
men’—men free from all evil qualities,—who are not ‘learned in the
Veda’; so that for superior *Śūdras*, the practices of their forefathers
would be authoritative.—‘Self-satisfaction’ is the determining factor in
the case of options; but this is an authority for the man himself, not
for others.

[](Javascript:void(0);)
