+++
title = "011 यो ऽवमन्येत"

+++
*Hetuśāstrāśrayāt*’.—‘Relying upon the argumentative science of the
Bauddhas, Cārvākas &c.’ (Medhātithi);—‘Relying on methods of reasoning
directed against the Veda’ (Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa).

The argumentative person is always decried: see *e*. *g*. 4.30, where
the ‘*Hetuka*’ is described as not fit to be honoured; the ‘*Hetuka*’ is
mentionod in 12. 111. as a person who must be a member of the *Pariṣad*;
though in the latter text the term has been explained as ‘one
well-versed in the principles of Mīmāṃsā and the Śāstras’ (see
*Mitākṣarā* on 3. 301, p. 1384).

‘*Nāstiko vedanindakaḥ*’—see *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 424)
where we read—‘The detracting of the Veda is of three kinds—(1) The
first is that which consists in seeking to prove the untrustworthy
character of the Veda by means of arguments culled from *Bauddha*,
*Jaina* and other treatises;—this has been described by Yājñavalkya as
being equal in heinousness to the murdering of a Brāhmaṇa. (2) The
second consists in neglecting the acts laid down in the Veda and Śrutis,
through one’s tendency to wranglings and disputations;—it is this that
is referred to by Manu under 2.11, who further regards it as equal in
heinousness to the drinking of wine. (3) The third consists in lack of
due faith,—the acts laid down being done only through fear of popular
odium, and not through any faith in them; tins has been mentioned among
*Minor Sins*.

This verse has been quoted in the *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 4) which
reads ‘*ubhe*’ for ‘*mūle*’ and explains it as ‘*Śruti* and *Smṛti*’;
for ‘*śrayāt*’ it reads ‘*shraya*’.


