+++
title = "016 निषेकादि-श्मशानान्तो मन्त्रैर्"

+++
‘*Mantraiḥ*’—This has been added with a view to exclude the woman and
the Śūdra, whose sacraments are not performed ‘with mantras’ (see 2.66
and 10.127).

Burnell remarks—‘In Vedic times the reception of outsiders into the
community was, to a certain extent, recognised, and ceremonies (*e*.
*g*. the *Vrātyastoma*) were in use for this purpose.’

It is rather difficult to be very dogmatic regarding what was, or what
was not, recognised ‘in Vedic times.’ But if the ceremony of the
*Vrātyaṣtoma* is the sole authority for the statement, then it has to be
borne in mind that the writer has not comprehended the purpose of those
ceremonies. If he had taken the trouble to find out what ‘*vrātya*’
meant, he would have found out that the ceremony was performed for the
*re-admission* of those who had become excluded by reason of the
omission of certain obligatary rites; and it was not meant for admitting
absolute ‘outsiders’.

This verse has been quoted by the Mitākṣarā on 1.3 (p. 6)—in support of
the view that it is the Twice-born persons alone who are entitled to
study the *Dharma Śāstra*.

It is quoted also in the *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 512) to the same
effect—also in the Aparārka (p. 14);—in the *Smṛticandrikā* (p. 18.)
which explains ‘*Niṣeka* as the *Garbhādhāna* sacrament and ‘*smaśāna*’
as the ‘after-death rites;—and in the *Varṣakriyākaumudī* (p. 574) as
implying that the rites are to be performed for the *Śūdra* also, but
without Vedic Mantras.

*Medhātithi* (p. 73, 1. 26)—*Ācāryakoraṇavidhinā
svādyāyādhyayanavidhināca*.’ Here both the *Bhāṭṭa* and the *Prābhākara*
views of *Śāstrārambha* are accepted by the writer.
