+++
title = "023 कृष्णसारस् तु"

+++
‘*Kṛṣṇaṣāraḥ*—Burnell—“What animal is intended it is impossible to say.
In Southern India, a pretty little, but rare, gazelle is taken for it.
It does not however answer to the name so far as its colour (light
brown) goes.”

From the explanation given by Medhātithi the deer meant is that which is
‘black with white spots’, or ‘black with yellow spots’; and there is no
doubt that the animal meant is that which is black in the upper, and
white (or yellow) in the lower parts of its body.

*Medhātithi* (p. 76, 1. 26)—‘*Śūrpādhikaraṇe*’—in Mīmāṃsā Sūtra 1-2-26;
and the next sentence ‘*etaddhi kriyate ityucyate*’ is from Śabara on
that Sūtra,—the whole sentence being—‘*etat* (*i. e. shakyate
kartumiti*) *hi kriyate ityucyate, na ca vartamānakālaḥ kaschidasti
yasyāyam pratinirdeṣhaḥ*.’

‘*Mleccadeśastvataḥparaḥ*’—Note the liberalised interpretation of this
provided by Medhātithi. Burnell curiously enough regards this to be an
‘order to dwell in this land’. There is no ‘order’ to dwell in the
Mleccadeśa. The countries to be inhabited having been defined and all
beyond these being designated as ‘Mlechadeśa’, the term ‘these
countries’ of verse 24 refers, as Medhātithi clearly points out, to
Brahmāvarta, Madhyadeśa, Brahmarṣideśa and Yajñīyadeśa; and the order to
dwell contained in verse 24 also refers to those, and not to the
‘Mlecchadeśa’, which is ‘beyond these.’

This verse is quoted in the *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 18), which
adds that the country described as ‘fit for sacrificial performances’ is
meant to be so used only when the aforesaid four countries are not
available;—in the *Vīramitrodaya* (Paribhāṣā,p. 56), which explains
‘*Yājñiyaḥ*’ as ‘fit for sacrificial performances’, and ‘*Mlecca*’ as
‘unfit *for sacrificial* performances’;—and in the *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p.
4).


