+++
title = "027 गार्भैर् होमैर्"

+++
*Medhātithi* (p. 80, 1. 8)—*Gṛhyasmṛtibhyo*—*vasātavyam*—see *Āśvalāyana
Gṛhya Sūtra* 1-13-14.

*Medhātithi* (p. 80, 1. 10) ‘*Mekhalā badhyate*’—see *Gautama*, 1-15.

This verse has been quoted by the *Mitākṣarā* on 3.253 (p. 1285), where
it has been taken to mean that the sacrament of the Upanayaṇa wipes off
all the sins committed by the boy prior to it.

It is also quoted in the *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 134) and has been
taken to mean that the Sacramental Rites are meant only for the
‘Twice-bom—and in the *Aparārka* (p. 25), as indicating that the
sacraments are meant for the Twice-born only, on the ground that they
have been mentioned after the injunction of *Upanayaṇa* which pertains
to the Twice-born only. It is quoted in the Smṛtikaumudī (p. 48), which
notes that the term ‘*Saṃskāra*’ (Sacrament) connotes *destruction of
sin or impurity*.

It is quoted in the *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 36), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Bīja*’ stands for semen-ovule, the impurity due to
defects in that is called ‘*baijika*’—that due to residence in the womb
is called, ‘*gārbhika*’;—‘*homaiḥ*’ includes the Garbhādhāna and other
rites that are accompanied by libations into fire;—and in the *Saṃskāra*
- *ratnamālā* (p. 5) to the effect that Homa is to be performed by the
*Twice-bom* only;—‘*baijika*’ is such impurity relating to the
semen-ovule as is due to the intercourse having taken place at a
forbidden time,—‘*Gārbhika*’ is the impurity due to residence in a womb
that is not quite clean;—it quotes Medhātithi to the effect that as.the
‘semen-ovule’ and the ‘womb’ cannot be the effects of any sins of the
child, the ‘*enaḥ*’ mentioned in the text must be taken as standing not
for actual sin, but for the impurity or uncleanliness due to the child’s
physical connection with them.


