+++
title = "028 स्वाध्यायेन व्रतैर्"

+++
‘*Vrataiḥ*’—(*a*) ‘The particular observances kept by the student while
studying particular portions of the Veda (Medhātithi, Govindarāja and
Nārāyaṇa);—‘the voluntary restraints, such as abstention from honey,
meat and such things’—(Kullūka and Rāghavānanda)—‘such observances as
the *Prājāpatya* penance’ (Nandana).

‘*Traividyena*’—‘By learning the meaning of the three Vedas’ (Medhātithi
and Nandana);—‘By undertaking the vow to study the three Vedas in
thirty-six years, as mentioned under 3.1 (Govindarāja, Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda).

‘*Ijyayā*’—‘*Ijyā*’ here stands for ‘the offering to the gods, sages and
Pitṛs’ (Medhātithi, Govindarāja, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—or ‘the
Pākayajñas’ (Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

‘*Brāhmīyam kṛyate tanuḥ*.’—‘Related to Brahman;’ *i*. *e*. ‘united with
the Supreme Spirit’—according to Medhātithi, who also notes that
according to ‘others,’ the meaning is that ‘the body is made fit to
attain Brahman.’ As the reference is to the ‘*tanuḥ*,’ ‘body,’ Burnell
understands that ‘Brahman’ stands here for the ‘world-substance, not as
a spiritual, but as a physical force’. This however is entirely off the
mark.

This verse is quoted in the *Mitākṣarā* (on 1. 103, p. 76) as setting
forth the desirable results acruing to the man who offers the Vaiśvadeva
offerings, which latter, on this account, cannot be regarded as
sanctificatory of the food that has been cooked.

This verse is quoted in the *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 140), where
the words are thus explained:—‘*Svādhyāya*’ stands for the *learning of
the Veda*;—‘*Vrata*’ for the *Sāvitrī and other
observances*;—‘*Traividyā*’ for the *knowledge of. the meaning of the
three Vedas*;—‘*Ijyā*’ for the *worshipping of the gods and
others*;—‘*Brahmā*’ for *related to Brahman, through the knowledge of
that Supreme Being*.


