+++
title = "029 प्राङ् नाभिवर्धनात्"

+++
‘*Hiranya-madhu-sarpisām*’—Though the text clearly says that the child
is to be fed with *gold, honey and butter*, it appears from the *Gṛhya
Sūtras* that the last two substances only are to be given to the child,
after they have been touched with a piece of gold.’—Buhler.

‘*Mantravat*.’—The mantras are those used by his own sect or his gurus.

Hopkins has the following note here:—“This commentator’s (Medhātithi’s)
use of ‘some think’, ‘some explain’ is such, as in this passage, to
suggest that they are occasionally used hypothetically, a possible view
being set up and overthrown rather than actual statement that other
commentators explain the passage so and so; a modification of meaning
that would somewhat affect the amount of criticism devoted to the text
before Medhātithi’s day.”

Though this may be true, to a certain extent, regarding the references
in the form of ‘*kechit*’, it cannot be so regarding those in the form
‘*anye tu*’ or ‘*anyevya cakṣate*’ and such other moṛe definite
references to *other explanations*.

This verse has been quoted by Raghunandana in his *Smṛtitattva* (Jyotiṣ,
p. 648)—dealing with the *Jātakarma* Sacrament;—also in the
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 353).

This verse is quoted in the *Puruṣārthacintāmaṇi* (p. 433) as laying
down the time for the ‘Birth-sacrament’;—in the *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p.
23) which adds the following notes—‘*Vardhana*’ is *cutting*; some
people have held that no significance attaches to the masculine gender
of ‘*puruṣaḥ*’; but Medhātithi has held that it is meant to be
significant, there being no such rite in the case of the child without
gender-signs, and for the woman it is performed without *mantras* in
accordance with another text;—it is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 31 *b*);—in *Hemādri* (*Pariśeṣa*, p. 583),
where‘*Vardhana*’ is explained as *cutting*; and again on p. 736, where
the same is repeated;—in the same work (Śrāddha, p. 326);—in
*Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 831) to the effect that the rite is to be
performed before the cutting of the umbilical cord;—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 49) to the same effect; it reads
‘*puruṣam*’ for ‘*puruṣaḥ*’

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 192) quotes it as laying down the exact
time for the performance of the sacrament, in the first half,—and the
form of the sacrament in the second half. It quotes it again (p. 403) in
support of the view that Manu having prescribed the sacraments of
*Nāmakaraṇa*, *Niṣkramaṇa*, *Annaprāśana*, *Chuḍā, Upanayaṇa* and
*Keśānta*, for the *male* child,—adds a verse (2. 66) to the effect that
‘all this is to be done for the *female* child &c. &c.,—which makes it
clear that the *Upanayaṇa rite* should be performed for the female child
also; and the statement (in 2-67) that for women the ‘marriage’
constitutes the ‘upanayaṇa’ only provides a possible *substitute* for
*Upanayaṇa* in the case of females.

This verse is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 171) as laying down the
*Jātakarma*, and explains ‘*vardhana*’ *as* ‘*cutting*.’


