+++
title = "030 नामधेयन् दशम्याम्"

+++
‘*Daśamyām dvādaśyām*’—‘The tenth of twelfth day of the
month’—Medhātithi, who also notes and rejects the explanation—‘after the
lapse of the tenth or twelfth day—i.e., ‘on the lapsing of the period of
impurity’—which is accepted by Kullūka.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 233) where it
notes the latter explanation and says that it has been rejected by
Medhātithi and Aparārka. It is curious that having the work of
Medhātithi before him, the author of Vīramitrodaya did not note his
explanation that the ceremony is to be performed on the 10th or 12th day
(*tithi*) of the month.

The verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 855) also, where however no
explanation is given—and in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 371), where it is added
that what is meant is that the naming of the Brāhmaṇa should be done *on
the expiry of the tenth day*, of the Kṣatriya *on the expiry of the
twelfth day*, of the Vaiśya *on the expiry of the sixteenth day* and of
the Shudra *on the expiry of the twenty-first day*;—and the second half
of the verse lays down substitutes.

This verse is quoted in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 24), which adds that
‘*daśamyām*’ has been taken as ‘*daśamyām añtāyam*’, ‘after the lapse of
the tenth day’,—that no significance attaches to the causal affix in
‘*kārayet*’;—in *Saṃskāṛaratnamālā* (p. 850), which adds that the causal
affix in ‘*kārayet*’ has the reflexive sense;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 34a);—and in *Sṛmticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 52), which
explains meaning as ‘on the tenth day from the day of the birth, the
*father* should do the naming’, it being the father’s business to do
this.


