+++
title = "035 चूडाकर्म द्विजातीनाम्"

+++
‘*Dharmataḥ*’—‘according to Law’ (Nārāyaṇa and Nandana);—‘for the sake
of spiritual merit’ (Kullūka).

This verse has been quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Saṃskāra, p. 605) for
the purpose of showing that even a boy who has not cut his teeth can be
‘one who has had Ids Tonsure performed.’

It is quoted in *Smṛti-tattva* (p. 653)—which points out that the time
most suited for the ceremony is the *third*, not the *first* year and it
bases this on the distinct declaration by Śaṅkha that—‘for the rite of
Tonsure, the third year is what has been accepted by all the
Gṛhyasūtras.’ It also quotes it on p. 922, with a view to show that the
time for the ceremony is not fixed, there being an option as to its
being done in the first, third, or even the fifth year.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 296), where it is
explained that the presence of the particle ‘vā,’ ‘or’, implies that the
rite may be performed in the *second* year also; this latter is also
sanctioned by a text from Yama.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 34) also quotes it without adding any explanatory
notes.—It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 58);—in *Hemādri*
(Pariśeṣa, p. 742);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (pp. 29 and 128), which quotes
Medhātithi to the effect that the term ‘*dvijātīnām*’ indicates that
this rite is not to be performed for the Shudra.;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 36c); and in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kālasāra, p. 219).

Medhātithi has described this ceremony as that ‘which consists in the
cutting of the hair in such a manner as to leave well-arranged tufts of
hair on certain parts of the head.’

Further details have heen supplied in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 361), which
quotes *Lokākṣi* (called Laugākṣi in *Smṛtitattva*, p. 653) describing
the ‘**Cū*ḍā*’as ‘a line of hair, towards the right among the
*Vaśiṣṭhas*, on both sides among the *Airis* and *Kāśyapas*, and in five
places among the *Āṅgirasas*; some people keep a single line; others
only the top-tuft, shaped like the leaf of the banyan tree—and adds that
the exact form is to be determined by the *Gṛhyasūtra, of the man
concerned*.


