+++
title = "038 आ षोदशाद्"

+++
Burnell, in applying the name ‘vrātya’ to ‘Aryans not Brāhmanised,’
should have quoted his authorities.

Kullūka notes that some people have taken the particle ‘*ā*,’ ‘till,’ in
the sense of ‘until the beginning of’.

This verse has been quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 342), where
it is pointed out that the ‘sixteenth’ and other years mentioned here
should be counted ‘from conception,’ as in the case of the *eighth* and
others in verse 36. It points out that this verse lays down the many
secondary occasions for the performance of the ceremony.

This same work on p. 344, refers to the passage in Medhātithi, where a
Vedic text is quoted, which connects. the *Gāyatrī Triṣṭup* and *Jagati*
metres with the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya respectively; and
as under 36, so here also, it explains that the limits fixed in this
verse too are determined by the number of syllables in a foot of each of
the three metres mentioned. A foot of the *gāyatrī* has eight syllables;
so till the bṇy is sixteen years old, the Gāyatrī retains more than a
third of its force; and it is only when the boy has passed his sixteenth
year (corresponding to the sixteen syllables of the two feet of the
*Gāyatrī*) that the force of the mantra becomes weakened. Similarly
twenty two years correspond to the twenty-two syllables of the two feet
of the *Triṣṭup*, sacred for the Kṣatriya, and twenty four years
correspond to the twenty four syllables of the first two feet of the
*Jagati* metre, sacred for the *Vaiśya*.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 446); and in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 36) as the outside age-limit for *Upanayana*;—in
*Hemādri* (Pariśeṣa, p. 751), which adds that ‘*ā*’ here denotes
limit;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra. p. 41b);—and in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 72), as Laying down the secondary times for the
initiation.

*Vidhānapārijāta*, (p. 471) has quoted the verse as laying down the
secondary occasion for Upanayana;—so also *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 184).


