+++
title = "041 कार्ष्ण-रौरव-बास्तानि चर्माणि"

+++
‘*Ruru*’—has been described by Rāghavānanda as ‘tiger.’

*Medhātithi* (p. 92,1. 11)—‘*Smṛtyantara*—This refers to Baudhāyana,
*Gṛhyasūtra*, 2. 5. 16.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p.„ 57) as laying down that the skin
of the *Kṛṣṇamṛga, Ruru* and *Chāga* should be worn as the ‘upper
garment,’ respectively, by the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya,

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 446), where it is
explained that the skins mentioned are to be used as the upper garment,
and the hempen and other cloths as the lower garment

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 20) quotes the second half as prescribing the
cloths to be used by the three castes respectively;—and the first half
(on p. 22) as laying down the skins.

The second half is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskā ra, p. 411) and the
first half also (p. 413).

The verse is quoted in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 36), which adds that the
skins of the Black Antelope, the *Ruru* deer and the goat are to be used
as the *upper garment*:—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 430);—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 75).

Burnell is again inaccurate in saying that cotton and silk (with the
well to do) are *alone* used now for outer garments.”

Medhātithi rightly remarks that the *triplication* cannot apply to the
Kṣatriya’s girdle; as on triplication the bowstring would cease to be a
‘bowstring. Govindarāja agrees with him. So also *Madanapārijāta* (p.
20) and *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra; p. 432), Rāghavānanda explains that
as the bow-string itself is a triplicated cord, no further triplication
would be necessary.

The ‘*Muñja*’ grass, in Northern India called *muṃja*, is, as Burnell
notes, the *Saccarum Sara* of the botanists.

Madanapārijāta (p. 20) explains that the *Muñja* has ‘*tejanī*’ as its
other name; and a foot-note adds that it is what is called *muragā*.

This verge is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 447);—also in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 432), which explains ‘*trivṛt*’ not as
*twisted three-fold*, but as ‘going round the waist three times’;—in
*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 189);—in

*Aparārka* (p. 58); in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 70), which explains
‘*trivṛt*’ as *threefold*;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 37), which quotes
Medhātithi to the effect that since bowstrings are made sometimes of
*leather*, the author has added the epithet ‘*Maurvī*’, ‘*Murvā* grass’;
in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 192), which reproduces the above remark of
Medhātithi, as also his further remark that the string is to be removed
from the bow and then tied round the waist: it adds the following notes:
the ‘*Samā*’, not uneven, thin in one place and thick in another; it
should be of uniform thickness all through;—the three-fold twist applies
to the hempen cord and not to the bow-string, which would cease to be a
bowstring when so twisted;—it is quoted also in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 43 b).


