+++
title = "043 मुञ्जालाभे तु"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 447),—and also in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 20), which latter agrees with Medhātithi in taking
the *Kuśa-Aśmāntaka-Balvaja* as pertaining to the Brāhmaṇa, the Kṣatriya
and the Vaiśya respectively.

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 433) explains that the term ‘*Muñja*’ in
the present verse stands for all its variants mentioned in the preceding
verse, and proceeds to quote the view that what is meant is that—(*a*)
for the Brāhmaṇa in the absence of *Muñja, Kuśa* should be used,—(*b*)
for the Kśatriya in the absence of *Murvā, Aśmāntaka*, and (*c*) for the
Vaiśya in the absence of *Śaṇa, Balvaja*; but dissents from it, stating
it as its own opinion, that all the three substitutes mentioned are
meant for each of the primary substances enjoined before. It cites
another view, according to which, since the present verse mentions the
*Muñja* only, the meaning must be that the three substitutes are meant
for the Brāhmaṇa only; so that for the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya, if the
substance primarily prescribed under the preceding verse be not
available, they should make use of some other suitable material
resembling the primary. But this view also is not approved as being in
conflict with the text of Yama, which says that—“in the absence, of
*these i.e*. the three, *Muñja, Murvā* and *Śaṇa*, the girdle should be
made of *Kuśa, Aśmāntaka* and *Balvaja*.”

The second half of the verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra) on
page 432, where it adds that the options mentioned do not depend
entirely on the wish of the wearer,—the number of knots being, in fact,
determined by the number of *Pravaras* of the *Gotra* to which the boy
belongs.

*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 189) also quotes this verse;—and *Aparārka* (p. 58),
which explains that the knots are to be made in accordance with one’s
‘Gotra-ṛṣis’;—also *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 37), which quotes Kullūka’s
explanation;—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 193) as setting forth
substitutes for the girdle-zone; it adds the following notes:—The term
‘*ādi*’ is understood here, the construction being ‘*Muñjādyabhāve*’,
‘in the absence of Muñja *and other substances*’; the number of knots is
to be the same as that of the wearer’s *Pravara*;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Saṃskāra, p. 43b);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 80), which adds
the note that ‘*trivṛt*’ means ‘threefold’; and that ‘*Muñja*’ here
stands for the *Murvā* and other substances specified in the preceding
verse.


