+++
title = "048 प्रतिगृह्येप्सितन् दण्डम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 451), where it is
explained that the Sun is to be worshiped as the sum total of the
connotation of the *Gāyatrī-mantra*;—and that one is to realise that he
is one with that deity. According to this authority the
‘*parītyāgnim*’means, not that the boy is to ‘walk round the fire’ (as
explained by Kullūka and Medhātithi), but that he should *tend the
fire*; and it proceeds to point out that the ‘tending of the fire’ is to
be done according to what has been laid down by Manu himself under 2.
186.

It is difficult to see how this writer would construe the adverb
‘*pradakṣiṇam*.’

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 935) in support of the view
that the particle ‘*atha*’ in the *Gṛhya-sūtra*: ‘*aiha
bhaikṣyañcarati*’ stands for the Upasthāna of the Sun and ‘*pradakṣiṇa*’
of the Fire;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 32); the latter explaining
‘*īpsitam*’ by ‘as prescribed for each individual, and not any other’,
adds that the Sun is to be worshipped with mantras sacred to that deity.
It accepts Medhātithi’s explanation of the phrase ‘*parityāgnim*’; and
points out that the three acts mentioned here all form part of the
procedure of ‘begging.’

It is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 481), according to
which also, ‘*īpsitam*’ means ‘what is prescribed for each particular
caste’;—and the phrase ‘*bhāskaram upasthāya*’ (though it quotes the
latter term as ‘*abhi-vādya*’) as ‘facing the sun’ (which is the
explanation, it adds, suggested by *Kalpataru*);—and ‘*Yathāvidhi*’ as
‘according to the rule laid down in the next verse.’ It adds that all
the three acts are subsidiary to the act of *begging*.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 60);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 60);—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 108), which explains ‘*Yathāvidhi*’ as
‘according to the ordinances—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyāvahāra, p. 124
a).


