+++
title = "052 आयुष्यम् प्राङ्-मुखो"

+++
‘*Ṛtam*’—‘Sacrifice,’ an alternative explanation suggested by,
Medhātithi and Nārāyaṇa.

*Medhātithi* (p. 97, L 20)—‘*Guṇakāmanāyām* *hi*, &c.’

This refers to Mīmāṃsā Sūtra 8.1.23 *et. seq*.

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva*, (p. 431) which remarks that the
verse refers to cases where a man makes it a rule to always face a
certain quarter at meals;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 34), which adḍs the
explanation that *śrīyam* and *ṛtam* are objects to the
present-participle ‘*icchan*’;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 377) in
support of the view that facing of the south is not interdicted when
done with a special motive. *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 324) also quotes the
verse to show that what is here prescribed applies to that eating which
is done with a special motive, the general law being that one should
face the east or the north .—*Aparārka* (p. 61) quotes the verse, and
adds the following explanation:—If one eats facing the east, it brings
longevity; one who eats facing the west, obtains prosperity; who eats
facing the north attains the truth or the sacrifice.—Thus eating with
face towards the east is both compulsory (as laid down in the preceding
verse) and optional, done with a special motive (as mentioned here).

It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 115), which adds the
following notes—‘*āyuṣyam*’ means ‘conducive to longevity’—one who eats
facing the east obtains longevity; hence the meaning of the text is that
‘one who seeks for longevity should eat facing the east similarly
‘*yaśasyam*’ meaning conducive to fame’;—eating with face towards the
south brings fame—and similarly one who seeks for wealth should eat
facing the west, and he who seeks for ‘*ṛtā*’ *i. e*., the truth, should
eat facing the north.


