+++
title = "058 ब्राह्मेण विप्रस्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 76), where it is
noted that according to Hemādri, the term ‘*vipra*’ stands for all the
three twice-born castes, on the ground that Yājñavalkya’s text bearing
on the subject uses the generic term ‘*dvija*—but this view is
controverted on the ground that it is more reasonable to take, on the
strength of Manu’s use of the particular term ‘*vipra*,’ the term
‘*dvija*’ of Yājñavalkya’s text as standing for the Brāhmaṇa only,
rather than the other way about; as in this there is no stretching of
the term ‘*dvija*’ which is often used for the Brāhmaṇa only; while in
the other case the natural meaning of the term ‘*vipra*’ is unduly
extended to other than Brāhmaṇas. The writer goes on to quote
Medhātithi’s words (p. 100, 11.20-21)—“The mention of the *Vipra* is not
meant to be significant here. For special rules for the Kṣatriya etc.,
are going to be added later on (in verse 62, *et seq*), and unless we
had a general rule there could be no room for specifications; \[and it
is the present verse alone that could be taken as formulating that
general rule, and hence it could not be taken as restricted to the
Brāhmaṇa only.”\] (*Translation* pp. 306-307);—and traverses this
argument, on the ground that the present text is not injunctive of
*Ācamana*, and hence the special rule that follows in verse 62 regarding
*ācamana* can have no bearing upon this verse; the real injunction of
*Ācamana* is contained in verse 61. Verse 58, therefore, it is
concluded, must be taken only as enjoining a particular ‘*tīrtha*’ for
the Brāhmaṇa.

Proceeding with the explanation of the verse, *Vīramitrodaya*
adds—‘*nityakālam*’ meaning *always*; so that whenever *ācamana* has got
to be done, it should be done by the Brāhmaṇa by anyone of the thfee
methods herein described; and it adds that such is the ‘*svarasa*,’
‘inclination,’ of Medhātithi also, which clearly refers to Medhātithi,
p. 100, 1. 22. It goes on to point out, however, that the view of many
Digests is that *as far as possible* the *Brāhmatīrtha* should be
used.,—such being the implication of the qualification ‘*nityakālam*,’
which is more nearly related to the first option; and the other
alternatives are to be taken up only when the *Brahma tīrtha* is
disabled.—‘*Kāya*’ means ‘dedicated to Prajāpati,’ and ‘*Traidaśika*,’
‘dedicated to the gods.’

It goes on to add that, though there was no possibility for the ‘*Pitrya
tīrtha*’ to be employed,—it not being mentioned among those
sanctioned,—yet it has been specially interdicted with a view to
indicate that the *Pitryatīrtha* is never to be used, not even when
every one of the three *tīrthas* permitted is impossible, through
pimples and sores: so that in such emergencies, the *tīrtha* to be
employed would be the *Āgneya* and others.

This verse is quoted in *Nityāchārapradīpa* (p. 64 and p. 253), which
notes that ‘*Kāyatraidaśikabhyām*’ is the secondary alternative
mentioned in view of the contingency of there being a wound or some
incapacity in the ‘*Brāhmatīrtha*;—in *Śuddhikaumudī* (p. 339), which
has the following note—‘*Kāya*’ is *Prājāpatya*; ‘*Traidaśika*’ is
*Daiva*; ‘*nityakālam*’ indicates that the second and third alternatives
are to be resorted to only in the event of the using of the first being
impossible;—in *Ācāramayūkha* (p. 20), which explains *traidaśikam*’ as
*daivam*;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 311), which connects the negative
particle ‘*na*’ with the whole of the second line, and explains
‘*brāhma*’ as the base of the *aṅguṣṭha*, ‘*kāya*’ as *prājāpatya*, the
base of the little finger, ‘*traidaśika*’ as *daiva*, the tip of the
fingers, and ‘*pitrya*’ the base of the index finger;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Paribhāṣā. p. 77), which quotes ‘Medhātithis’
explanation of the derivation of the term ‘*traidaśikam*’.


