+++
title = "059 अङ्गुष्ठमूलस्य तले"

+++
‘*Aṅgulimūle*’—‘at the base of the little finger’ (Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda);—‘at the base of the fingers’ (Medhātithi and Nandana)

*Medhātithi* (p. 101,1. 8)—‘*Tathā ca Śaṅkhaḥ*’—Though Medhātithi
appears to be quoting the very words of *Śaṅkha*, the actual passage
from Śaṅkha reads as follows:—

> kāyaṃ kaviṣṭakāmūle tīrthamūktammanīṣibhiḥ  
> aṅguṣṭhamūle ca tathā prājāpatyaṃ vica?ṇai \|  
> aṅgus?yagre sthitaṃ daivaṃ piś?yaṃ tarjanimūlake \|

Here ‘*Kāya*’ is distinguished from ‘*Prājāpatya*’ *Vīramitrodaya* also
cites Medhātithi as quoting Śaṅkha’s text.

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 77), which offers
the following explanation—‘*anguṣṭhamūla*’ means the lower part of the
thumb; and on the palm-side of this is the ‘*Brāhma-tīrtha*.’ ‘*Tala*’
is the *palm*; and that part of the palm which extends from the base of
the thumb to the first long line in it constitutes the
‘*Brāhma-tīrtha*’; and the part which lies between the base of the
fingers and the long line parallel to them is the ‘*Kāya-tīrtha*’;—and
at the tip of the fingers lies the ‘*Daiva-tīrtha*.’—The term ‘*agre*’
is to be construed with ‘*aṅguli*,’ which is the predominant factor in
the compound ‘*aṅgulimūle*.’—‘*Pitryam tayoradhaḥ*.’—Here also ‘*tayoḥ*’
stands for the two terms ‘*aṅguli*’ and ‘*aṅguṣṭha*’; and the particular
‘*aṅguli*’ or ‘finger’ meant here is the ‘*fore-finger*; so that the
‘*Pitrya-tīrtha*’ would be ‘below’ the thumb and the forefinger.—The
words of the text as they stand, if taken literally, do not yield any
sense; that is why recourse has been taken to the more or less indirect
construction, as explained above.


