+++
title = "061 अनुष्णाभिर् अफेनाभिर्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 66), where it is
explained that what the epithet ‘*anuṣṇabhiḥ*’ means is that the water
should *not be heated by fire*, as is distinctly stated by Viṣṇu;—again
on page 77, where it is stated to be the injunction of *ācamana* in
general, for all the three castes;—also on page 79, where it is added
that ‘*ekānte*’ means *not crowded*,—where alone the mind can be calm
and collected,—as is laid down by Viṣṇu.

On the tern ‘*prāgudaṅmukhaḥ*,’ this work has the following note,
criticising Medhātithi’s explanation:—“The term *prāgudaṅmukhaḥ* must
mean the *north-east quarter*, on the strength of the declaration of
Hārīta; and in the Śruti also we see the term used in the sense of the
*north-east*—*e. g*. in the passage referring to the branch of the
*Palāśa* tree—

‘*Prāchīmāharati*, *udīchīmāharati*, *prāgudīchīmāharati*’ and also in
*Kātyāyanasūtra*, where it is said—‘*prāgudakpravaṇam devayajanam*,’
where the term ‘*prāgudak*’ stands for the north-east. For these reasons
the assertion of Medhātithi—that ‘the term *prāgudak* being never found
used in the sense of north-east, it should not be explained as
such,’—must be disregarded. Medhātithi has explained the compound
*prāguduṅmukhaḥ* as a Bahuvrīhi compound composed of three terms,
whereby the meaning comes to be that the man must face the East or the
North.”

The writer has conveniently ignored Medhātithi’s reference to Gautama
1.35, in support of his interpretation.

The second half of the verse is quoted in *Śuddhi-kaumudī* (p. 339);—and
in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha, p. 983), which notes that ‘*anuṣṇābhiḥ*’ is meant
to prohibit the water heated by fire.


