+++
title = "062 हृद्गाभिः पूयते"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 221);—in
*Smṛtitattva* (p. 335), which points out that for the Śūdra, there is no
*ācamana*, as the verse stops short at the Vaiśya; so in the place of
*ācamana*, the Śūdra should wash his hands and feet;—this is clear from
a text of the Brahmapurāṇa;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Āhnika, p. 74),
where it is explained that ‘*antataḥ*’ means *inside of the mouth*; and
hence what is meant is that there should be no *drinking* of the water,
which should only touch the inner part of the mouth;—such being the
opinion of *Kalpataru*. It is curious that *Kalpataru*, as quoted in
*Vīramitrodaya*, has quoted Manu 5.13 9, where ‘*antataḥ*’ does not
occur at all, and missed the present verse, which, as *Vīramitrodaya*
rightly remarks, is the text that really supports the explanation
provided by *Kalpataru. Vīramitrodaya* notes Medhātithi’s explanation
with approval on p. 75.

This verse is quoted in *Kṛtyasārasamuccaya* (p. 46);—in *Hemādri*
(Śrāddha, p. 985), which adds the following notes:—‘*Hṛdgābhiḥ*,’
reaching the regions of the heart,—‘*Pūyate*’ acquires
purity;—‘*Kaṇthayābhiḥ*,’ just touching the throat only,—‘*bhūmipoḥ*,’
the Kṣatriya;—‘*prāśitāḥhiḥ*’, just taken into the mouth, and not
reaching the throat,—‘*antataḥ*,’ the affix ‘*tasi*’ has the force of
the Instrumental,—the term ‘*anta*’ meaning *near* requires a
correlative, that to which *nearness* is meant,—so that the meaning is
that the Śūdra is purified by water reaching that point which is in
close proximity to that which the water should reach for purifying the
Vaiśya;—and as the *tongue* is the point for the Vaiśya, for the Śūdra
it must be the *teeth*; though the water that reaches the teeth must
touch the tongue also, yet all that is meant is that the quantity for
the Śūdra should be just a little less than that for the Vaiśya.

It is quoted also in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 221).


