+++
title = "064 मेखलाम् अजिनम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 451), which says
that it lays down the method of disposing of the sacred thread and other
things whenever they happen to break;—also in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 190).

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 934) which says that, as the use of
mantras is essential, if a certain Gṛhyasūtra does not mention the
mantra, it has to be borrowed from another Gṛhyasūtra;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 423), where also the verse is explained as
laying down the ‘disposal’ of the tilings mentioned. The latter quotes
the verse again on p. 887, where it is explained that in a case where an
injunction lays down a certain act as to be done ‘with the proper
mantras’—as is done in the present verse—and no particular *mantra* is
prescribed? one has to use the *mantra* that may be found mentioned in a
particular *Gṛhyasūtra*. This is what ‘*mantravat*’ has beeif explained
to mean, in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 37 also.)

It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra,, p. 85) as laying down the
disposal of the sacred thread that has been worn out;—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 39), which notes that the meaning of the term
‘*mantravat*’ is that they have to be worn with those same mantras that
were used for wearing them at the *Upanayana*;—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Paribhāṣā, p. 72) as an example of the principle that where the text
laying down a certain act as to be done ‘with mantras’ does not specify
the particular mantras to be used, these have to be taken as laid down
in other *Gṛhyasūtras*.


