+++
title = "066 अमन्त्रिका तु"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (p. 926);—in *Madanapārijāta* (p.
362), where *āvṛt* is explained as *jātakarmādikriyā*; and *yathākramam*
is to taken to mean that there should ho no deviation from the exact
order of sequence—such deviation necessitating expiation;—in
*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 188);—and in *Aparārka* (p. 30), which explains
*āvṛt* as ‘*kriyā*’, act, rite;—‘*aśeṣtaḥ*’ as along with all details’,
and ‘*yathākramam*’ as meaning that the order of the sacraments should
not be disturbed or else the *Sarvaprāyaścitta* has to be performed.’

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, at several places, on pages
194, 255, 278, 317 and 403). On p. 194, ‘āvṛt’ is explained as
*jātakarmādikriyā*; and on the term ‘*amantrikā*’ it is added that what
this interdicts is the use of only those *mantras* that pertain to the
*primary* acts of eating butter, honey and the rest, and not the use of
the *subsidiary* mantras; and this conclusion is in accordance with the
principle enunciated in *Mīmāṃsā Sutra* 3.8. 34-35, where it is declared
that the qualification of *upāṃśutva* (silence) pertains to only the
primary rite of the ‘*Ātharvaṇa Iṣṭis*’ and not to the subsidiary
ones.—On p. 255 the verse is quoted in support of the view that the rite
of *Niṣkramaṇa*, is to be performed in the case of the female baby
also.—Similarly on p. 278, it is quoted to show that the rite of
‘*Annprāśana*’ should be performed for the female baby.—On p. 317, it is
made to justify performance of the rite of ‘Tonsure’ for girls.—On page
403, it is quoted as laying down the performance of all the
sacraments—beginning from the *Jātakarma* and ending with the *Keśānta*;
whereby it is concluded that the *Upanayaṇa* also, for girls is to be
done ‘without mantras’; another view is noted, whereby the pronoun ‘this
‘*iyam* in Manu’s text is taken as standing only for the first five
sacraments, ending with Tonsure, so that *Upanayaṇa* and *Keśānta*
become excluded from the category. But this view is rejected; and in
answer to the argument that “in view of the declaration in the following
verse that for women *Marriage* constitutes *Upanayaṇa*, the pronoun
‘*iyam*’ in the present verse must exclude *Upanayaṇa*—it is pointed out
that all that the next verse means is that in the case of a person
following the opinion of another Smṛti and not performing the
*Upanayana* for his girl,—Marriage should be regarded as constituting
her *Upanayana*; and not that in all cases Marriage should take the
place of *Upanayana*. The conclusion is stated thus:—There are two kinds
of girls—‘*Brahmavādinī*’ and ‘*Sodyovodhū*’;—for the former there is
Upanayana, in the eighth year, vedic study, and ‘return’ (completion of
Vedic study) before puberty,—and marriage also before puberty; while for
the *Sodyovodhū*, there is *Upanayana* at the time of marriage, followed
by immediate ‘completion of study,’ which is followed immediately by
Marriage. But from the assertion in certain Smṛtis that there used to be
Upanayana for women in a ‘previous cycle,’ it seems that in the present
cycle, it is not to be performed. (Bee note on the next verse).

The above note regarding the two kinds of women is based on a passage in
Hārīta Smṛti (quoted in *Madanapārijātā*, p. 37), which adds that all
this refers to another cycle. The exact words of Hārīta mean as
follows:—“There are two kinds of women—Brahmavādinī and Sadyovadhū; for
the former, there are Upanayana, fire-laying, vedic study in the house
itself and also alms-begging; while for the latter, when the time of
marriage arrives, Upanayana should be performed somehow and then
marriage.”

This verse is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Saṃskāra, p. 400);—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 00) which explains ‘*āvṛt*’ as meaning the
Jātakarma and other rites, and adds that this implies that none of the
rites is to be omitted for the women.


