+++
title = "067 वैवाहिको विधिः"

+++
‘*Vaivāhikovidhiḥ*’—‘Sacrament performed with Vedic texts’ (Nandana and
Rāghavānanda);—‘Sacrament for the purpose of learning the Veda’
(Medhātithi and Nārāyaṇa).

This verse has been quotçd in *Gadādharapaddhati* (Kālasāra, p. 220) to
the effect that for women *Marriage* itself is *Upanayana*;—in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 61), which notes that for women,
‘attending’ on husband takes the place of ‘service of the teacher,’ and
‘household duties’ take the place of ‘tending the fire,’ and that for
girls also, before marriage, there are no restrictions regarding food
and other tilings;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, pp. 403-4), where
it is discussed along with the preceding verse (see note on 66). This
verse has been taken as excluding women from *Upanayana*, entirely. But
the author points out that this is not right; and he sets forth his
well-considered opinion at the end (see note on 66); and the present
verse he takes only as laying down a substitute for the Upanayana in the
case of those women who are not *Brahmavādinīs*.

*Vīramitrodaya* proceeds to explain the verse to mean that ‘*vaidikaḥ
saṃskāraḥ*’—‘the sacrament which is gone through for the purpose of
studying the Veda,’—*i. e*., Upanayana—consists, in the case of women,
in the ‘rites of marriage’; *i. e*., consecration brought about by the
marriage-rites, as has been “declared’ by the ancients. It points out
that such is the meaning of the verse with the words ‘*Saṃskāro vaidikaḥ
smṛtaḥ*’ as read by Medhātithi; but *Mitākṣarā* and other works adopt
the reading ‘*aupanāyanikaḥ smṛtaḥ*’ instead of ‘*saṃskāro vaidikaḥ
smṛtaḥ*’, which means that marriage rites *serve the purpose of
Upanayana rite*; so that marriage would be for women what *Upanayana* is
for men.

This verse is quoted also in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 37), which also adopts
the reading ‘*aupanāyanikaḥ smṛtaḥ*.’


