+++
title = "105 वेदोपकरणे चैव"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 149), as an
exception to the rule mentioning certain days as ‘unfit for study’;—and
the term ‘*upakaraṇa*’ is explained as *aṅgāni*, ‘the subsidiary
sciences’; and the ‘*nitya-svādhyāya*’ as that reciting of Vedic texts
which constitutes the ‘*Brahmayajña*’. The same work quotes it again (on
p. 314) as precluding the *Brahmayajña* from the scope of the rule
prohibiting the reading of Vedic texts on certain days.

It is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (I, p. 534) as embodying an exception
to the rule regarding days unfit for study;—and again in II, p. 262 as
embodying an eulogy on *Brahmayajña*;—also in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 105)
as laying down a case where the rules relating to time unfit for study
do not apply;—and also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 537), as the
foremost exception to the rules regarding days unfit for study.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 137), where ‘*vedopakaraṇa*’ is explained
as ‘*vedāṅga*’;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 141), which construes the
passage as ‘*vedopakaraṇe naityake nānadhyāyaḥ*,’ as otherwise there
would be conflict with other texts;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, pp.
148 and 162) which adds the following notes: ‘*Vedopakaraṇa*’ are the
*Vedāṅgas*—‘*nitya-svādhyāya*’ is *Brahmayajña*;—in *Hemādri* (Śrāddha,
p. 775);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 59), which supplies the same
explanation of ‘*nityasvādhyāya*’;—and in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 338),
which explains ‘*Vedopakaraṇa*’ as the *Vedaṇgas*, and notes that the
singular number is used since the noun is treated as a *class-name*.


