+++
title = "122 अभिवादात् परम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 25), where the following
notes are added:—‘*abhivādāt*,’ *i.e*., after the word ‘*ahhivādaye*,’
‘I salute’—one should mention his name, ‘I am so and so’;—the term
‘*vipra*’ stands for all the *twice-born* men;—also in *Saṃskāramayūkha*
(p. 45), which says that what is meant by ‘*abhivādāt*’ is ‘after having
pronounced the words ‘*I salute*’;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p.
96), which adds the explanation ‘one should pronounce his own name, *I
am Devadatta*, after having saluted.’

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 450), where the following
explanation is added:—When saluting the elder—*i.e*., an aged
person—‘*abhivādātparam*’—*i.e*., after uttering the word
‘*abhivādaye*’, ‘I salute,’—one should utter his proper name, ‘I am so
and so.’ It has been declared in the *Yajñasūtra* that the generic
pronoun ‘*asau*’ (‘so and so’) indicates the proper name. Since the text
uses the term ‘elder,’ it follows that the method here laid down is not
to be employed in saluting such *uncles* and other superior relatives as
are younger in age to the saluter; the method for saluting them is going
to be described later on. The term ‘*Vipra*’ includes the *Kṣatriya* and
the rest also; as is clear from the rules regarding the returning of
salutation, under verse 127 below.

On the expression ‘*ahamasmi*,’ this work quotes Medhātithi’s remark
that both ‘*aham*’ and ‘*asmi*’ meaning the same thing, the use of the
one or the other is optional. But this has been quoted as the opinion of
‘others’ by Medhātithi. This view is rejected by Vīramitrodaya as being
repugnant to Manu, verse 122. It rejects the view of Kullūka also, who
opines that the term ‘*nāma*’ need not be used in the formula.

This verse is quoted also in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 296) where too
the term ‘*abhivādātparam*’ is explained to mean—‘Having first uttered
the words *I salute*, he should pronounce his name’;—and in Aparārka (p.
52), which says that the formula is ‘*abhivādaye caitranāmāhamasmi
bhoḥ*.’;—and in *Aparārka* (p. 52), which *bìiivādaye caitranāmāhamasmi*


