+++
title = "123 नामधेयस्य ये"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 501) as laying down the
method of salutation also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 451), where
the following observations are made:—

‘In the case of such illiterate men as do not comprehend the salutation
addressed to them in the form of the Sanskrit sentence declaring the
name of the saluter,—*i. e*. who do not understand that they are being
saluted,—as also in the case of all women, literate and illiterate,—one
should not omit his own name, and say simply, ‘I salute you and if even
this much is not understood, then the salutation may be made even with
corrupt vernacular words;—such is the implication of the term
‘*prājña*,’ *wise*. The ancients have defined ‘*abhivādana* ‘salutation’
as *obeisance with the prescribed formula*.

There is a difference among—

1.  *Pādopasaṃgrahaṇa* (clasping the feet),
2.  ‘*Abhivādana*’ (salutation)
3.  and ‘*Namaskāra*’ (bowing);

—the (1) being reserved for Teachers and Elders, (2) for people very
much older than the saluter, and (3) for those only slightly older; so
says Harihara; and *Kalpataru* also mentions ‘*abhivādana*’ and
‘*Pādopasaṃgrahaṇa*’ separately; Manu himself mentions the two
separately in verse 216 below.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 54) as laying down that the
saluting of illiterate persons is to be done in the same form as that of
women;—also in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 98), which adds the
explanation:—‘To persons not conversant with the proper way of returning
the salute along with the name of the saluter,—as also to all women—the
salutation is to be offered only with the words ‘*aham bhoḥ*,’ ‘*it is*
*I*, *sir*!’


