+++
title = "125 आयुष्मान् भव"

+++
Buhler adopts the reading ‘*pūrvākṣaraplutaḥ*’, which is given by
Nandana, and mentioned by Nārāyaṇa. The meaning, according to this, as
Buhler remarks, is that the name Devadatta should be pronounced as
‘Devadattā.’ Medhātithi and Kullūka adopt the reading ‘*pūrvākṣaraḥ
plutaḥ*,’ under which the meaning is that ‘the vowel *a*, which occurs
at the end of the consonant, should be pronounced ultra-long.’
“According to this interpretation,” says Buhler, “Manu’s rule agrees
with Āpastamba and Pāṇinī (8-2-88). Govindarāja and Rāghavānanda go far
off the mark.”

Several commentators note that ‘*vipraḥ*’ includes all the twice-born
persons.

*Medhātithi* (p. 182, 1. 4)—‘*Tatra pūrvasmin &c*.’—Kullūka’s expounding
of the compound is simpler—‘*pūrvam*’
*nāmagatam*—‘*akṣaram*’—*vyāñjanam—saṃśliṣṭam yasya sa pūrvākṣaraḥ*.’

*Ibid*, (p. 182, 1. 8)—‘*Bhagavān Paṇinīḥ*’—This refers to the sūtra
‘*acontyādi ṭi*’ which defines the ‘ṭi’ as ‘that which has for its
beginning the last among the vowels’; and the example given in
*Siddhāntakaumudī* under Sūtra 8.283 is, *Āyuṣmān bhava Devadattā*’;
from which it is clear that the name ‘ṭi’ is applicable to the vowel ‘a’
in ‘tta’ and it is ‘*tadādi*’—having for its beginning the last of the
vowels—in the sense that it ends in itself, it being regarded as its own
constituent part, according to *Śabdenduśekhara*, which has the
following note—

> nanu mārtaṇḍa ityatra mārtaśabdāntyāc takārākāraḥ sa
> ādiryasyetyanyapadārtho durlabha iti cenna \| ekasminneva
> samudāyatvāropeṇa tadavayavatvāropeṇa ca tadupapatteḥ \|\|

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 297), which adds
the following notes:—The compound ‘*pūrvākṣaraḥ*’ is to be expounded as
*pūrvara akṣaram yasya*; and the ‘*purvam akṣaram*’, ‘preceding
syllable,’ in a name is the consonant, since a vowel can not be
‘preceded’ by another vowel; hence the meaning comes to be that the
vowel at the end of the final consonant should be pronounced ultra-long.
The term ‘*akṣaraḥ*’ stands for all vowels that may occur at the end of
a name \[This is exactly what Medhātithi and Kullūka have said\]; the
text could not have meant the vowel ‘a’ only; as it is not possible for
all names to end in that vowel. Thus the formula comes to be—‘*āyuṣmān
bhava saumya Devadattā*.’

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 26), which supplies three different
explanations:—At the end of the words ‘*āyuṣmān bhava saumya*,’ the name
of the saluter should be pronounced—‘*Viṣṇuśarman*’; (*a*) at the end of
the name an ‘a’ should be pronounced, and of this ‘a,’ the
‘*pūrvasvaraḥ*,’ the preceding syllable,’.should be ultra-long. The
masculine form ‘*akṣaraḥ*’ is a Vedic archaism, \[ the right form being
‘*akṣaram*’\]. Though the syllable ‘preceding’ (the ‘a’ pronounced after
the name ‘*Viṣṇuśarman*’) would be ‘n,’ yet inasmuch as the consonant
could not be pronounced ‘ultra-long,’ the term ‘preceding syllable’
would apply in this case to ‘a’ that is contained in the name \[ *i.e*.
the ‘a’ after ‘m’\]; and it is this ‘a’ that would be pronounced
ultra-long \[The formula thus being ‘*āyuṣmān bhava saumya
Viṣṇuśarmā3n*’\].—(&) ‘*Pūrvākṣaram plutam*’ is another reading, in
which case the construction is all light \[and there is no archaism\];
the meaning being that ‘the preceding syllable is to be pronounced
ultra-long.’—(*c*) Or, the sentence ‘*akāraśchāsya nāmno’nte*’ may be
explained as follows:—The vowel ‘a’ (*ākāraḥ*) that appears at the end
of ‘his’ (‘asya’, the saluter’s) ‘name’ (‘*nāmnaḥ*’)—‘a’ mentioned only
by way of illustration, any vowel at the end of the name being meant,—is
what is qualified by the qualifying word ‘*pūrvākṣaraḥ*’—which means, in
this case,—*that which has the syllables, akṣaram, in the name*
‘*preceding*’—‘*pūrvāṇi*,’—*itself*; and such a vowel should be
pronounced ultra-long,—and no other ‘a’, either in the name itself, or
added after the name.

The formula, according to all these explanations, is ‘*āyuṣmān bhava
saumya Devadattā3*.’ This is not accepted by *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra
p. 452), which would omit the word ‘*saumya*,’ which in Manu’s text, it
takes as standing for the name of the saluter; so that the formula
according to it would be ‘*āyuṣmān bhava Devadattā3*.’ It argues that if
we don’t take the word ‘*saumya*’ as standing for the name, we would
have to seek elsewhere for the injunction for *pronouncing the name* in
regard to which the second half prescribes the ultra-elongation of the
final ‘a.’—As regards the second line of the verse, it takes it to mean
that, ‘the *a* tliat appears at the end of the saluter’s name should be
pronounced ultra-long;—and adds that the vowel ‘*a*’ here stands for
vowels in general; as all names do not, and cannot end in ‘*a*’, in the
case of names ending in consonants also, fhe syllable to be
ultra-elongated would be the *last of the vmvels* contained in the name;
it is clear from Pāṇini’s rule that the ‘*ṭi*’ syllable is to be so
pronounced (see *note*, above)—and it is the last *vowel* that is called
‘*ṭi*’.—In the compound *pūrvākṣaraḥ* ‘*akṣara*’ means *consonant*, and
the compound means ‘that which has a consonant immediately preceding
it’; so that the text comes to mean that ‘the vowel that has a consonant
immediately preceding it should *not* be separated from the consonant
and then pronounced ultra-long; it should be pronounced along with the
consonant.’ It concludes that this explanation is in agreement with
Medhātithi and several others. According to this view the formulas would
be—(*a*) ‘*āyuṣmān bhava Devadattā3*’ (where the name ends in a vowel)
and (*b*) ‘*āyuṣmān bhava Somaśarmā3n*,’ where the name ends in a
consonant.

The same work goes on to add that Haradatta has adopted the reading
‘*pūrvākṣaraplutaḥ*’ (see note above) and has explained the verse as
follows:—At the end of the name is to be pronounced an additional
‘*a*’—over and above the syllables in the name itself,—and this
additional ‘*a*’—is to be ‘*pūrvākṣaraplutaḥ*,’—*i. e*., ‘having its
preceding syllable—*i. e., vowel*—ultra-long’;—*i. e*., the vowel
preceding the additional ‘*a*’ should be ultra-long; and this may be
done also where consonants may be intervening between the two. Thus in
the case of there being no intervening consonant, the formula would be
*āyuṣmān bhava saumya Devadattā3*,’ while in that of there being an
intervening consonant, it would be *āyuṣmān bhava saumya Agnichi3da*’
(where the consnant, ‘*d*’ intervenes between the additional ‘*a*’ at
the end, and the vowel ‘*i*’ preceding it.)

It further adds that the term ‘*vipraḥ*’ includes the *Kṣatriya* and
others also, as is clear from the fact that in grammar we find rules
(*a*) making the ultra-elongation of the final vowel *optional* in the
case of the saluter being a *Kṣatriya* or a *Vaiśya*, and also (*b*)
prohibiting the elongation in the case of the saluter being a *woman* or
a *Śūdra*.

This work quotes Medhātithi to the effect that the words in the text
‘*āyuṣmān bhava saumya*’ are meant to be purely illustrative, and it is
not meant that these should be the very words used; it is thus that even
such returns become permissible as—‘*āyuṣmānedhi*,’ ‘*dīrghāyurbhūyāḥ*,’
‘*cirañjīva*’ and others that are in common use among cultured people.

This verse is quoted also in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 191), where
‘*pūrvākṣaraḥ*’ is explained as referring to the letter preceding the
‘n’ in ‘*śarman*’;—and in *Aparārka* (p, 53), which adds the following
note:—The ‘*akāra*’ here stands for the final vowel in the name of the
saluter; hence whichever. vowel occurs at the end of the name should be
pronounced ultra-long; hence ‘*pūrvākṣaraḥ*’ means ‘that which is
preceded by a syllable’; this syllable preceding the final vowel must be
a consonant. Hence the meaning is that the vowel, along with the
consonant, should be pronounced ultra-long. It does not mean that an
additional ‘a’ is to be added at the end of the name.

It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 98), which adds the
following notes:—The vowel ‘*a*’ here stands for any vowel that occurs
at the end of a name; there is no such rule as that every name must end
in ‘a’; hence the elongation pertains to the vowel that occurs at the
end of a name; and it does not mean that an additional ‘*a*’ has to be
added at the end of every name.

It is quoted also in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 46), which has the same
remarks regarding the vowel ‘*a*’; it adds:—According to some people,
the title ‘*śarman*’ also has to be pronounced; so that the formula
would be ‘*āyuṣmān bhava Devadattā śarman*.’ Others hold that the
elongation prescribed is to be done to the ‘a’ contained in the term
‘*śarman*’ But this is open to doubt, as the term ‘*śarman*’ does not
form part of the *name*; if it did, then, as some other syllables would
necessarily be required to be prefixed to this, it could not be possible
to have any name ‘with two letters’, as has been prescribed. This
elongation of the vowel is not done in the name of the *Śūdra*, who is
excluded, according to Pāṇini’s Sūtra ‘*Pratyabhivāde’śūdre*’; this
however makes it clear that the salutation of the *Śūdra* also is to be
returned.


