+++
title = "134 दशाब्दाख्यम् पौरसख्यम्"

+++
“Those who are ‘friends’ and equals may address each other with the
words ‘*bhoḥ*’, ‘*bhavat*,’ or ‘*vayasya*’, ‘friend’. The explanation of
the verse, which is substantially the same in all the commentaries, is
based on Gautama’s passage (6.14-17); while Haradatta’s interpretation
of Āpastamba (1.4.13) somewhat differs.”—(Buhler).

“A small difference in age constitutes among relatives a difference in
position; but in other cases only a considerable difference as
specified.—This ‘equality’ refers to the form of salutation among
equals.”—(Burnell—Hopkins).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 466), where the
following explanation is given:—Among persons living in the same city,
and not possessed of any exceptional learning or wealth or other
qualifications, if the difference in the age of two persons extends to
within ten years, they are to treat each other as ‘friends,’ and there
is to be no salutation; the ‘city’ here includes the village also;—among
persons versed in music and other arts, equality extends to within five
years of difference in age;—and among those learned in the Veda to
within *one* (as read here) year;—and among *Sapiṇḍas*, to within a very
short period of time. In every case there is ‘superority’ if the
difference exceeds the periods mentioned.

It is quoted also in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 299), where also we
have the following explanation Among inhabitants of the same village one
is to be treated as ‘friend’ if he is older by less than ten years;
beyond that he is to be treated as ‘superior’.—Among men expert in the
arts and in learning, there is equality if there is a difference of five
years;—among persons learned in the Veda, or students of the Veda, there
is equality if there is a difference of *three* years, after which the
older man becomes ‘superior’;—among blood relations, brothers and the
rest, the older person is to be treated as an equal only when the
difference in age is very small.

*Parāśaramādhava* raises the question of saluting such *Ṛtvik* and
others as are younger in age. In view of the general rule that these
should be saluted, the fact of any one being younger in age does not
deprive him of his right to a salute. The conclusion however is that all
that is meant is that they have to be ‘treated with respect’; and this
implies that one should stand up to receive and welcome them with
agreeable words, as is clearly laid down by Baudhāyana, who says,

> ṛtvikśvaśurapitṛ?yamātulānāṃ tu yaviyasāṃ pratyutthānābhibhāṣaṇam.

That these are not to he saluted is clearly asserted by Gautama (6.9),
which lays down that these are anabhivāthāḥ (?), It is interesting to
note that in quoting Gautama, Mādhava has read *abhivādanam* in place of
*anabhivādyāḥ*; but knowing somehow that the meaning of Gautama was that
these are *not* *abhivādyāḥ*, he has explained *abhivādanam* as
*abhibhāṣaṇam*, *speech*.

The verse is quoted also in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 29) as declaring the
difference in age which constitutes ‘superiority’. It practically
repeats the explanation given in *Parāśaramādhava* (see above); but at
the end adds that among blood-relations, the difference of even one day
establishes superiority; while between relations born on the same day
there is equality as declared by Āpastamba.—‘One born on the same day is
a *friend*.’

*Aparārka* (p. 53) quotes this verse and adds the following
explanation:—Among citizens even one who is ten years older is a ‘friend
and it is only one who is more than ten years older is to be regarded as
an ‘elder’; among musicians and other artists one older by five years or
less is a ‘friend’, older than that he becomes an ‘elder’; among Vedic
scholars, it is upto three years; and among these latter, superority or
inferiority is determined by special qualifications.—-The particle
‘*api*’ means ‘*eva*’.

It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 101), which offers the
following explanation:—Among citizens, one who is senior by one to ten
years is to be regarded as a ‘friend’—an equal; one older than that is
an ‘elder’—a superior;—among artists people versed in singing, dancing
and so forth there is ‘friendship’ upto a difference of five years;
among Vedic scholars it extends to a difference of three years; older
than that, is ‘elder’—superior; among blood-relations there is
‘friendship’ within a limit of very few years; one even a little older
is to be saluted like an ‘elder’;—all this refers to Brāhmaṇas.


