+++
title = "137 पञ्चानान् त्रिषु"

+++
This verse is quoted along with verse 136 in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra,
p. 474), which adds the following explanation:—Among the three castes,
Brāhmaṇa, Kṣatriya and Vaiśya, the person who possesses a greater amount
of the preceding qualification (among the five mentioned in 136) is to
be honoured more than one possessed of the succeeding one only. Thus a
person possessed of greater wealth and superior relations is higher than
one only older in age; one possessed of a higher degree of wealth,
relations and age is higher than one superior in action only;—one
possessed in a higher degree of wealth, relation, age and action is
superior to one possessing learning only;—‘*guṇavanti*’ means
*superior*; which means that between two persons possessing wealth, he
is higher whose wealth is *superior*; and the ‘superiority’of wealth
would consist in its having been acquired by lawful means and such other
circumstaṇces. In the case of ‘relations,’ this superiority would
consist in being more intimate and so forth;—in the case of ‘age’ it
would consist in being very much older;—in that of ‘action,’ in its
being equipped with all auxiliary details;—in that of ‘learning,’ in its
being acquired in the prescribed manner.—‘*Tenth stage*’ stands for the
age over ninety years; the hundred years of man’s life being divided
into ten equal spans, the tenth one coming after the ninetieth
year;—-when he has reached this age, the Śūdra also becomes entitled to
honour at the hands of the twice-born.

The last foot of the verse regarding the ‘tenth stage’ is quoted on p.
453 also, as declaring the respectability of the Śūdra.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 159), where ‘*daśamī*’ is
explained as ‘the last ten years of the hundred years’;—‘*bhūyāṃsi*’ as
to *number* and ‘*guṇavanti*’ as to *degree*;—hence without considering
the caste, one possessed of superior learning is to he respected by
another possessed of less; or one who knows more subjects is to be
respected by another knowing a lesser number; similarly in regard to
‘*karma*’ and other qualifications also;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 48),
which explains ‘*daśamīm gataḥ*’ as ‘over ninety years of age,’ and
‘*pañchānām*’ as ‘among learning and the rest’;—and in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 106), which explains ‘*daśamī*’ as ‘the last part of
hundred years, *i*. *e*. beyond ninety years,’ and adds that ‘old age’
is meant to be indicative of the presence of wealth and the rest also.




