+++
title = "140 उपनीय तु"

+++
‘*Rahasyam*’—‘The Upaniṣads, along with their explanations—(Medhātithi,
Govindarāja, Kullūka, Nandana, and Rāghavānanda);—‘the esoteric
explanations of the Vedas and the subsidiary sciences,—not the
*Upaniṣads*, these being included in the term ‘*Veda*’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse has supplied Prabhākara with his text on which to base the
entire enquiry into the nature of Dharma. Kumārila has taken as his
basic text the Vedic text ‘*svādhyāyo’dhyetavyaḥ*’ (), and has proceeded
to explain that the ‘*Svādhyāya*,’ ‘Vedic Study,’ herein enjoined cannot
be the mere reading up of the verbal text of the Veda, but also a due
understanding of its meaning; and as this meaning could not be
comprehended without careful investigation, it becomes necessary to
undertake the investigation initiated by the Mīmāṃsā Śāstra,

The sentence ‘*svādhyāyo’dhyetavyaḥ*’ contains in reality the injunction
of that Vedic recitation which is done daily, and not of the initial
study and scrutiny of the sense etc. Hence Mādhava (in Parāśaramādhava,
Ācāra, p. 1'40) has suggested that the basic text for Kumārila should
have been that Vedic text which we assume on the basis of the
Smṛti-rules relating to *Upanayana*.

Prabhākara does not accept Kumārila’s view. He argues that, according to
the view of Kumārila, any and every man—twice-born or otherwise—would be
entitled to Vedic study, only if he fulfils the condition of desiring to
know *Dharma*. Prabhākara bases his enquiry into Dharma and Vedic study
on the rule ‘*aṣṭavarṣam brāhmaṇam upanayīta*’, where the Ātmanepada
standing in ‘*upanayīta*’ clearly implies that the *Upanayana*,
Initiation of the Pupil, is meant to serve some purpose for the
Initiator himself; this purpose is no other than the acquiring of the
title of ‘Ācārya—how this title can be acquired is explained in the
present text of Manu, according to which that man alone is to be called
*Ācārya*. who (*a*) initiates the pupil, and (*b*) teaches him the Veda
along with the Ritualistic and Esoteric Treatises. The motive-desire
thus, for all this study and investigation is on the part of the
teacher, and not on that of the pupil; it is the Teacher who desires to
acquire for himself the title of Ācārya and as this cannot be done
without *teaching*, the pupil comes in only as the person *to be
taught*; and as the latter cannot be a pupil until he studies, this
studying by the pupil is implied by the above texts. This explanation
avoids the difficulty of a *non-dvija* undertaking. Vedic study; the
prospective Teacher being a learned man, conversant with the law, would
never admit a *non* - *dvija* pupil. Though the injunction of Vedic
study is thus implied in the above-quoted texts, yet they do not supply
the motive for the pupil; the Teacher’s desire for obtaining a title and
honor cannot serve as a motive for the pupil; hence, it is explained,
the motive purpose of the pupil lies in his desire to learn the meaning
of the Veda; this is what leads him to proceed with the investigation
into Dharma.

This view of Prabhākara has been combated, in its turn, by Mādhava
(Parāśaramādhava-Ācāra, pp. 138-139), who argues that Teaching having
been laid down as means of livelihood, it is clearly a *Kāmya-karma*—an
act prompted by physical motives—and hence *anitya*, non-obligatory; as
such it cannot be accepted as the sole prompter of the act of *Vedic
Study*, which is *nitya*, obligatory; the latter must have an
independent injunction for itself.

It is in connection with the above discussion in course of its
presentation of Prabhākara’s view, that the present verse has been
quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 137); and again on p. 304, where
it is put forward as setting forth the definition of the ‘*Ācārya*’ as
distinguished from the ‘*Upādhyāya*.’

The verse is quoted also in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 477), as
defining the ‘Ācārya’—where ‘*Kalpa*’ is explained as *a particular
treatise which lays down, on the basis of clearly perceptible Vedic
texts, the practical details of ritual*; and as including the other
subsidiary sciences also;—and ‘*rahasya*’ as *Upaniṣads*,—these being
mentioned separately (from the Veda) by reason of their importance;—and
in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 45) which explains ‘*rahasyam*’ as standing for
the Upaniṣads.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 30);—in *Aparārka* (p. 65), which
adds that the term ‘*Kalpa*’ includes Grammar and the other subsidiary
sciences, as also Mīmāṃsā and Nyāya,—the etymological meaning of the
term being ‘that which *determines* (*kalpayati*) the meaning of the
Veda;—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 90) to the effect that the
Ācārya is to teach not only the Veda, but the Upaniṣads, and the
Ritualistic Manuals &c., also.


