+++
title = "142 निषेकादीनि कर्माणि"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 302) as defining
the ‘*guru*’, the clasping of whose feet has been prescribed;—also in
the *Prāyaścitta-kāṇḍa* of the same work (p. 259), in support of the
view that the term ‘*guru*’ denotes primarily the *father* only;—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 477), which adds the following explanatory
notes:—‘*Niṣeka*’—the rites of conception; and the sacramental rites
referred to are those beginning with these and ending with the
‘imparting of the Veda’;—‘*sambhāvayati*’ means *nourishes*. The
performance of the rites of conception alone is sufficient to entitle
the man to the title of ‘*guru*’; the other qualifications have been
added only with a view to indicate that the person referred to here
deserves higher honor than the Ācārya;—such is the view of Śūlapāṇi.

*Madanapārijāta* (p. 31) on the other hand, states that the term
‘*vipraḥ*’ stands here for the *Father*; from which it follows that a
father who does not fulfil the conditions stated is not a ‘*guru*’ at
all.

The verse is also quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (on 3.- 259, p. 1297) in support
of the view that the term ‘*guru'* primarly denotes the *Father*, the
title ‘*guru '* belonging to the person who performs the conception and
other rites, *i.e*., the progenitor himself;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda*
(Prāyaścitta, p. 11 b);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 88), which
explains ‘*niṣeka*’ as *garbhādhāna*, and adds that ‘*annasambhāvana*’
includes the ‘teaching of Veda’ also;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 44), to
the effect that the Father alone is the ‘*guru*’;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra*
(p. 356) to the same effect;—and in *Prāyaścittaviveka* (p. 128) to the
same effect; but it combats the view that the *Father* only is entitled
to be called ‘*guru*’.


