+++
title = "170 तत्र यद्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 335), as laying
down that the Upanayana constitutes the ‘*brahmajanma*,’ ‘brahmic’ or
‘Vedic’ ‘birth.’ The compound ‘*brahmajanma*’ is expounded as ‘*brahmaṇā
vedena gāyatrīrūpeṇa janma iva*,’—i. e. the rite which is like *birth*,
through the *Brahman* or *Veda*, in the form of *Gāyatṛī*;—*i.e*. it is
a rejuvenation brought about by the sanctificatory rite. The idea of
this being a ‘birth’ has been spoken of in the Śruti
also—‘*Gāyatryā-brāhmaṇamasṛjat tṛṣṭubhā rājanyam jagatyā vaiśyam na
kenachicchandasā śūdram*—That the term ‘*brahma*’ (in the compound
‘*brahmajanma*’) does not stand for the *whole Veda* is made clear by
the qualification ‘*mauñjībandhana-chihnitam*,’ ‘marked by the tying of
the girdle—this tying of the girdle being done immediately after the
imparting of the *Gāyatrī*, and not after the whole Veda has been taught
It goes on to add that this same fact has been stated by Medhātithi
negatively, in the passage ‘*tayāhi anuktayā tanna niṣpannam bhavati*,
(until the Gāyatrī has been imparted, the Upanayana is not
accomplished). \[This passage occurs on p. 153, 1. 22 of Medhātithi,
where however the reading found is *tanniṣpannambhavati* ‘It becomes
accomplished by the expounding of the *gāyatrī*’ (Translation, p. 459);
which is a *positive*, and not a *negative*, assertion, though the
meaning is the same in both cases\].—The conclusion therefore is that
the name ‘*Upanayana*’ pertains to the *imparting* *of the
Gāyatri-mantra*.

It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 59) as supplying the
reason for regarding *Upanayana* as a second ‘birth.’


