+++
title = "172 नाऽभिव्याहारयेद् ब्रह्म"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (I, p. 24) in support of the view
that the uninitiated twice-born is like the Śūdra, and as such should
not pronounce Vedic mantras except in Śrāddha;—again in the same work,
on p. 795, to the same effect, where it adds the following
notes:—‘*svadḥā*’ is *śrāddha*’, and ‘*svadhāninayana*’ means ‘that
group of mantras by which the śrāddha is *accomplished*’ (‘*svadhā
śrāddham ninīyate yena mantrajātena*’);—barring this group of mantras,
he shall pronounce none other; in every other case the mantra would be
recited for him by a Brāhmaṇa.—The same work (II, p. 383) quotes the
verse again, in support of the view that the uninitiated boy also is
entitled to recite Vedic mantras at *śrāddhas*;—where ‘*abhivyāhārayet*’
is explained as ‘*vadet*’, *should pronounce*, the causal affix ‘*ṇich*’
being used reflexively.

*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 327) quotes the second line, in support of
the view that whenever the twice-born person is described as *having the
character of the Śūdra*, it is by reason of his being not entitled to
Vedic Study;—again on p. 348, where it is explained that ‘equality to
the Śūdra’ is a ground for the man’s not being entitled to rites
involving the use of Vedic mantras;—that this is so is indicated by the
particle ‘*hi*,’ (which means *because*)...... In fact whenever a
twice-born person is spoken of as being *like the Śūdra*, what is meant
is that he is not entitled to the performance of rites involving the use
of Vedic mantras.

It is quoted in *Vyāvahāra Bālambhaṭṭi*, (p. 656);—and in
*Nityācārapradīpa* (p. 23), as laying down the law for the uninitiated.


