+++
title = "241 अब्राह्मणाद् अध्यायनम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 513) in support of
the view that under abnormal circumstances learning may be acquired from
the Kṣatriya and the rest also; where it is explained that the
‘following’ here laid down is to be done only during the time that the
study is being carried on; and the implication of the mention of this
alone is that the other forms of ‘service’ are excluded; (such as
washing of the feet and the,like; this is in agreement with
Medhātithi);—and that ‘learning’ here includes *gems* and other things
also.

The verse is quoted also in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 519);—in
*Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 52), which explains that the ‘distress,’ ‘*āpat*’
meant here is the absence of a *Brāhmaṇa* teacher, and that in the case
of the non *-Brāhmaṇa* teacher, there is to be mere ‘following,’ no
feet-washing and the like;—in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 325), which adds
the same notes and explains ‘abrāhmaṇa’ as ‘ Kṣatriya or Vaiśya’;—and in
*Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 143), which says ‘following’ is the only
‘service’ to be rendered, and that also only during the course of study.

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 458) in support of
the view that the rules laid down regarding life-long studentship
pertain only to cases where the Teacher is a duly qualified
*Brāhmaṇa*;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 109) to the effect that life-long
studentship is permissible under a *fully efficient Brāhmaṇa
Teacher*;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 549), where also it is
pointed out that the rules relating to life-long studentship laid down
below (under verses 247 *et. seq*.) pertain to cases where the teacher
is a fully qualified *Brāhmaṇa*.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 72) in support of the view that
in the event of having a Kṣatriya or some other caste for his ‘teacher,’
the Brāhmaṇa shall not take up life-long residence under him,—nor with a
Brāhmaṇa who is not fit to expound the Veda;—also in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 168).


