+++
title = "248 एतेष्व् अविद्यमानेषु"

+++
*Deham sādhayet*—‘Let the body wear away’ (Medhātithi and
Govindarāja);—‘shall make the Soul in his body perfect, *i.e*. fit for
union with Brahman’ (Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 458) as laying down
the duties of the lifelong Student;—in *Vidhānapārijāta* (p. 504);—in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 106);—and in *Vīramitrodaya-Saṃskāra*, (p. 504),
where the note is added on the expression ‘*sthānāsanavihāravan*’ that
what is meant is that ‘during his spare time left after he has fully
accomplished all his duties, he may stand or sit or walk about’.
Medhātithi explains it to mean ‘at times he shall stand, and at times
sit down,—in this manner he shall divert himself.’ But he goes on to add
another explanation offered by ‘others’, by which the meaning is that
‘he shall practise the postures prescribed in connection with *Yogic*
practices, and live on alms’.—Nārāyaṇa explains the phrase to mean a
particular form of austerity consisting in ‘standing, sitting and
wandering’.—It is quoted in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 167), which
explains the phrase to mean ‘standing, sitting and moving at stated
times.’

This phrase ‘*sthānāsanavihāra*’ appears to have been an old idiom; it
is met with for the first time in Baudhāyana’s Dharmasūtra (II. 1. 41),
where we read —

> *samudrasamyānam...... eṣāmanyatamat kṛtvā chaturtha kālāmitabhojinaḥ
> syuḥ ape? bhyapeyuḥ savanānukalpam sthānāsanābhyām viharanta ete
> tribhirvarṣaistadapahanti pāpam*.

Translated literally, this means—

> ‘Sea-voyage (and a few other acts enumerated)..., having done any one
> of these acts, people should eat sparsely at the fourth part of the
> day, should enter water in the morning, at midday and in the evening;
> *amusing themselves by sitting and standing*, *they destroy that sin
> after three years*.’

The exact meaning of the expiatory rite here prescribed has never been
understood. Whenever the question of sea-voyage has come up for
discussion, the antagonists of the voyage have held that by the last
clause Baudhāyana clearly meant that the voyager should have to commit
suicide; to spend three years ‘standing and standing’, *i.e*. without
any sleep—would he nothing short of self-immolation. The protagonists of
sea-voyage felt all along that the passage could not mean this; though
they were unable to suggest any other plausible explanation. They
thought that even if suicide were actually meant, there were more
effective means available for doing that; and in fact the ordinance that
‘the man shall not sleep for three years’ looked absurd on the face of
it.

We find the expression in several other works.

\(1\) In *Padmapurāṇa* (Ādi-khaṇḍa, 58. 26) we read in course of the
description of the duties of Vānaprastha, the man in the third stage of
life—*sthānāsanābhyām viharet na kvachid dhairyamutsṛjet*, ‘he shall
divert himself with sitting and standing, and shall not renounce his
steadiness on any point.’

The committing of suicide certainly could not form a duty of the
ordinary Yānaprastha, the hermit retiring from active life to a life of
meditation and worship.

\(2\) In *Yājñavalkya* (III 50) we read—*sthānāsanavihārairvā
yogābhyāsena vā tathā* (*dinam nayet*), where *Mitākṣarā* adds the
explanation—*kañcit kālam sthānam kañcit chopaveśanam*, ‘for some time
he shall sit, and for some time he shall stand’—in this manner he shall
spend the day. And Aparārka says—*sthānena gatinivṛttyā, āsanena,
upaveśanena vihāreṇa caṅkramaṇena* (*i*. *e*. ‘resting, sitting, and
walking) *ca divasam nayet*.

\(3\) Again in *Manu* (VI. 22) ‘*sthānāsanābhyām viharet*’ where
Medhātithi says, ‘*sthānāsanābhyām dine, rātrau tu
kevalasthaṇḍilaśāyītām vakṣyati*’, by which also the text means—‘he
shall spend the day in standing and sitting.’

\(4\) Lastly in *Manu* (XL 224) we meet with the same expression; and
here it forms part of the *Kṛcchra*—penance.

From all this it is clear that the phrase could never have been intended
to lay down anything so physically impossible as passing three years
‘without sleep.’ In fact a careful study of all the above texts leads us
to the conclusion that what is meant by the words ‘*sthānāsanābhyām
viharet*’ is exactly what is expressed by the Hindi idiom ‘*uṭha baiṭha
kara samaya bitānā*’; and the sense would appear to be that the man
shall have recourse to no other diversion or amusement, save what may be
obtained by ‘standing or sitting.’


