+++
title = "001 अधीयीरंस् त्रयो"

+++
The injunction for the study of the Veda by the three castes has been
set forth in the text—‘The entire Veda, along with the esoteric
treatises, shall be studied by the twice-born;’ and for all householders
it has been laid down as an obligatory duty that they shall not forget
what has been learnt,—in such texts as—‘One shall be always intent upon
Vedic study’ (375), ‘He shall constantly ponder over the scriptures’ and
so forth; and it is the Veda alone that can be called ‘*śāstra*,’
‘scripture,’ in its primary sense of ‘instructing;’ since, it is the
Veda alone that propounds injunctions not obtainable by any other means
of knowledge; hence the Veda alone is the ‘scripture;’ and this term is
applied to other works only indirectly, on the basis of their resembling
the Veda in being like it, a literary composition. Thus then, it follows
that the Veda shall be constantly recited, and there is evil involved in
abandoning its study. As for the ‘*Brahmayajña*’ (which is done daily),
this can he accomplished by the life-long daily repetition of a single
*hymn*, a single *Sāma-song*, a single mantra or a single section; and
hence that does not imply the necessity of remembering the entire text
of the Veda.

Thus then, there being nothing left, which could form the original
subject-matter of the present injunctive text (‘*shall study* &c.’), it
has to be taken as a mere *reiteration*,—made for the purpose of
precluding the *Kṣatriya* and the *Vaiśya* from the function of
*teaching*, in the words ‘*of these the Brāhmaṇa alone shall teach it,
not the other two*.’

“As a matter of fact, there can be no possibility of those two castes
undertaking the work of *teaching*, which has been reserved exclusively
for the *Brāhmaṇa*, in such texts as ‘Teaching belongs to the Brāhmaṇa
alone.’ \[So that there could be no occasion for the preclusion intended
by the present text.\]”

There is no force in this objection. The texts have hitherto reserved
the function of Teaching for the *Brāhmaṇa*, only as a means of
livelihood; so that the exclusion of the other castes would also appear
to be with reference to the same; and the *imparting of knowledge* as a
meritorious act would still be permissible for the other two castes; it
is this possibility that the present text precludes.

Even granting that there is a general prohibition (of Teaching, for the
other castes), the present text maybe taken as reiterating a settled
fact, for the purpose of introducing the subject of the admixture of the
castes and their functions. In this manner the order of sequence of the
original promise would be duly maintained,—as set forth above, in the
words ‘The duties of the Vaiśya and the Śūdra, *then the origin if the
mixed castes*’ (1.116).

In this connection some people argue as follows:—The work of
‘*Teaching*’ consists in *instructing one to pronounce the words*, and
‘*expounding*’ includes also the *explaining* of the meaning of the
words. So that the former prohibitions of

‘Teaching’ cannot mean the prohibition of ‘expounding;’ and for this
latter, a fresh injunction (in the shape of the present text) becomes
necessary.

An objection is raised—“We do not find the word ‘*Veda*’ in the present
verse; wherefore then should the action of *studying* be taken as
pertaining to the *Veda*? The reading of secular prose and poetry is
also called ‘study.’”

The answer to this is as follows:—If the latter were meant, then the
injunction would have to be taken as put forth with a view to some
invisible result only; and that would necessitate the assuming of some
such result as would be desired by the man undertaking the said study,
as also the discovering of some authority for such an assumption. On the
other hand, if we interpret the text as we have done above, it is found
to have its authority in a well-known Vedic text, and there is no need
for assuming another basic authority for it.

What is meant being already expressed by the term ‘*twice-born*,’ the
term ‘*three castes*’ has been added for the purpose of filling up the
metre; so also the epithet ‘*devoted to their duties*’—(1)


