+++
title = "004 ब्राह्मणः क्षत्रियो"

+++
What are these ‘castes’? Is the word ‘caste’ denotative of a species of
human beings? No; these are four castes, begining with the ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’
and ending with the ‘*Śūdra*.’ The others—the ‘*Barbara*,’ the
‘*Kaivarta*’ and so forth—are only mixed races, as will be described
later on.

Of these four, three castes are ‘*twice-born*,’—the ‘Initiatory Rite’
being prescribed for them.

‘*One caste*’ is the *Śūdra*; there is no ‘Initiatory Rite’ for him;
since the injunction of this rite contains the distinct mention of the
three castes, *Brāhmaṇa* and the rest;—*e.g*., ‘the Brāhmaṇa shall be
initiated in the eighth year, the Kṣatriya in the eleventh and the
Vaiśya in the twelfth;’ and nowhere is the name of the *Śūdra*
mentioned.

“Since no time is specified in connection with the *Śūdra*, it may
simply mean that there is no time fixed for his Initiation.”

This might have been the meaning, if there were a general injunction for
Initiation (for all men in general); and in that case all these rules
regarding the castes, the times for initiation would have to be taken as
purely commendatory details. There is however no such general injunction
for Initiation. Under the circumstances, on the strength of what
authority could we take the Śūdras’ Initiation as to be done without any
restriction regarding time?

“If that is so, then what is the point in reiterating that *there is one
caste the Śūdra*?”

True; but it serves the purpose of removing a suspicion; on the strength
of the assertion that it is done without sacred texts, the idea may be
entertained that for the Śūdra there is Initiation without any
restriction as to time.

“But the assertion quoted occurs in connection with the
‘*Food-Sacrifices*;’ and having served its purpose in that connection,
it could not be made to refer to anything else.”

That is why we have said that there would just be a *suspicion*. In
reality, however, the verse serves the purpose of restricting the actual
practices of men.—(4)


