+++
title = "027 एते षट्"

+++
‘*These*’—the ‘*Sūta*’ and the other sons of the ‘inverse order’—‘*beget
similar castes on women belonging to the same caste as
themselves*,’—*i.e*., children belonging to the same caste; *e.g*., on a
‘*Sūta*’ mother, the ‘*Sūta*’ father begets a son of the ‘*Sūta*’ caste;
similarly on a ‘*Caṇḍāla*’ mother the ‘Chaṇḍāla’ father begets a son of
the ‘*Caṇḍāla*’ caste.

‘*So also those belonging to the mother’s caste procreate*’—the sons of
the ‘natural order,’ who belong to their mother’s caste,—those described
above as ‘called by the name of the lower caste.’ (14).

These also beget sons of their own caste on women belonging to the same
caste as themselves; *e.g*., the ‘*Ambaṣṭha*’ father on the ‘*Ambaṣṭha*’
mother. So also on a *Vaiśya* woman, a person of the lower caste, begets
*Vaiśyas*; because of the mention of the ‘mother’s caste.’

Others read ‘*mātṛjātau prasūyante*’; and this means as follows:—On
women of their own caste,—*i.e*., the ‘Ambaṣṭha’ and the rest,—as also
on those of their mother’s caste—*i.e*., the Vaiśya—they beget sons of
the same caste as themselves.

Though the ‘*Ambaṣṭha*’ and the rest are superior to the pure *Vaiśya*,
yet the text speaks of *equality*; because both are equally entitled to
the rights and privileges of the *Vaiśya*.

That ‘sons of the natural order’ are meant is indicated by the term
‘*mother’s caste*’,—even though the context clearly pertains to ‘sons of
the inverse order.’

‘*As also on women of higher castes*’— People, born in the ‘inverse
order,’ having intercourse with women of higher castes, beget sons; and
these are of a lower status,—this being understood from the
consideration of what follows.

As a matter of fact, sons begotten by the ‘Āyogava’ and the rest on
‘Āyogava’ women do not obtain the title of ‘Āyogava’; and the
‘similarity’ meant is simply that they are of the ‘inverse order’; and
when some sons are declared to be of a ‘lower status,’ this is based
upon the relative status (of the several kinds of sons of the inverse
order).

Thus the meaning of the sentence comes to be that—‘From persons born in
the inverse order are born persons of the same order, on women belonging
to the same or to higher castes.’—(27)


