+++
title = "031 प्रतिकूलं वर्तमाना"

+++
Each caste gives rise to several ‘mixed castes;’ from some castes
proceed castes in the ‘natural order,’ and from some in the ‘inverse
order,’ while from some both ‘natural’ and ‘inverse.’ From the Brāhmaṇa
only those in the ‘natural’ order (1-3) and from the Śūdra only those in
the ‘inverse’ older (4-6); and from the *Kṣatriya* and the *Vaiśya*
proceed those in the ‘natural’ order, as well as those in the ‘inverse’
order. From the Kṣatriya proceed *two* ‘natural,’ and *one* ‘inverse’
sub-caste; (1-9) from the Vaiśya *two* ‘inverse’ and one ‘natural’
(9-12).

These make *twelve* sub-castes, ‘natural’ and ‘inverse.’

When each of these has intercourse with women of each of the four
castes, they give rise to four divisions of each of these twelve.

Among these some are ‘*disgraced*,’ and others ‘*not disgraced*’; but
all of them are ‘*still more alien*’ than their fathers;—what is meant
by this ‘alien’ character is that they are several degrees removed from
their parents, specially on account of their having fallen off from
their sacred duties.

All this is explained by means of examples.

We shall enumerate the ‘inverse’ sub-castes in detail—(A) The Āyogava,
born from the Śūdra father and the Vaiśya mother, begets four sons on
women of the Brāhmaṇa the Kṣatriya, the Vaiśya and the Śūdra castes;
these along with the *Āyogava* himself make *five*. Similarly the
*Kṣattṛ* and the *Caṇḍāla*. Thus of the *Śūdra* there are three groups
of five; which make *fifteen*; (B) Similarly born of the Vaiśya father
there are two ‘inverse’ sub-castes,—the ‘Māgadha’ born of a Kṣatriya
mother and the ‘Vaidehaha’ of a Brāhmaṇa mother; of the Śūdra mother,
the son born is of the ‘natural’ order. Of these when the son born of
the Śūdra mother begets sons on the four castes, then the same process
takes place. When he has intercourse with a Śūdra woman, then the
sub-caste that is born is a degree lower than himself; similarly having
intercourse with a Vaiśya woman, he begets one still lower. (C) But
those born to the Śūdra father from the Brāhmaṇa and the Kṣatriya women
are ‘superior.’ Thus it is that while some are ‘*disgraced*,’ others are
‘*not disgraced*.’ The same holds good regarding the Brāhmaṇa and the
Kṣatriya father. But in the case of the Brāhmaṇa there is this
peculiarity that to him all the sons that are born are in the ‘natural’
order. A combination among these sub-castes gives rise to endless
divisions. This is what has been spoken of above (in 29)—‘that beget
many alien sons etc.’

‘*Discordantly*’— contrary to law.

‘*Behaving*’—having intercourse.

‘*Hīnāhīnān*’— is one compound word. Or (taken as two distinct words),
it may mean—‘while *disgraced* themselves (*hīnāḥ*) they beget sons *not
disgraced* (*ahīnān*).

‘*Fifteen castes*’;—inasmuch as it has been declared that ‘there is no
fifth caste’ (Verse 4), the term ‘caste’ must be taken here as used
figuratively.—(31)


