+++
title = "041 स्वजातिजानन्तरजाः षट्"

+++
From ‘twice-born’ persons, sons born of women of the same caste as
themselves belong to the same caste; and all these ‘*partake of the
character of twice-born persons*’;—this is the reiteration of a
well-known fact And the assertion that sons born of women of the next
lower caste also stand on the same footing is made for the purpose of
indicating that the same rights and privileges belong to those also.

‘*Those born of women of the next lower caste*’—*i.e*., in the ‘natural
order’; of those born to the Brāhmaṇa father and the Kṣatriya or Vaiśya
mother, or those born to the Kṣatriya father from the Vaiśya mother.

These ‘*partake of the character of twee-born persons*’—*i.e*., they
should have the Initiatory Rite performed for them, and having become
initiated, they become entitled to all that pertains to a twice-born
person.

“It has been declared under 14 above that ‘they are called by the name
of the next lower caste,’ which means that all such sons of the natural
older belong to their mother’s caste; so that it would naturally follow
that they are entitled to all that pertains to that caste.”

True; but since the passage referred to uses the term ‘name,’ people
might have the idea that the sons are only so *by name*, and not *by*
caste; hence with a view to make the point dear, we have another
assertion in the present text, which asserts that ‘*the six sons partake
of the character of twice-born men*.’

Those sons however who are born of ‘*violation*’—i.e., of a mixture of
the castes—‘*are of the nature of Śūdras*,’—*i.e*., having the character
of the Śūdra, they are entitled to the rights and duties of that caste.

The peculiarity in connection with sons born in the ‘inverse order’ is
going to be described later on. The term ‘*next lower Caste*’ in the
present text has been added only for the purpose of indicating that what
is said here applies to the sons of the ‘natural order’ only. So that
the son born to the Brāhmaṇa from a *Vaiśya* women, who is one step
removed from the ‘next lower caste’—also becomes included. But, the
number being limited to ‘six,’ the son bora to the Brāhmaṇa from the
*Śūdra* woman,—*i.e*., ‘*Pāraśara*’—is not included here.—(41)


