+++
title = "063 अहिंसा सत्यम्"

+++
‘*Purity*’—refers to external purity, brought about by the use of clay,
water and such things.

‘*Sum, and substance*.’—This means that this is what pertains to entire
human community, and not only to the Brāhmaṇa and the other castes.

The rest has been already explained.

“If ‘abstention from injuring creatures’ is the duty of the mixed castes
of the ‘inverse’ order, how is it that it has been declared
that—‘killing fish is the livelihood of the Niṣādas’ (48), ‘and the
catching of animals,’ living underground’ (49), and ‘the killing of wild
animals for the *Kṣattṛ* and others?’”

In answer to this some people offer the explanation that the ‘abstention
from injuring’ refers to injury other than that which has been
prescribed as one’s livelihood.

Others think that what is here meant is that ‘abstention from injury’ is
that kind of duty which is the source of spiritual welfare, and it does
not mean the absolute prohibition of all injury. Just As it is in the
case of the assertion—‘there is no harm in the eating of meat etc.,
etc.’

“If ‘abstention from injury’ is *a duty*, how are the men to subsist?
Other sources of income being not available to them, and abstention from
injury being regarded sis conducive to spiritual welfare, what would be
their means of livelihood? Specially as all other professions have been
restricted to each distinct caste. For instance, teaching and other
similar professions; are absolutely impossible, and cannot be available;
agriculture and cognate professions are restricted to *Vaiśyas*; and
service is the exclusive duty of the Śūdra.”

How these men are to subsist we shall explain below, under 116. It is
further stated (in 46) that ‘they shall subsist by doing undespised
manual labour for the twice-born people’; and what could be more
‘despised’ than *injuring living beings*? As for the ‘killing of fish,’
this could be of no use to twice-born men? It is true that an occasional
use for it has been spoken of in connection with *Śrāddhas* and the
reception of guests; but that could not serve as a permanent means of
livelihood.

From all this it follows that no one is free to do any killing or
injuring of living beings.—(63)


