+++
title = "064 शूद्रायाम् ब्राह्मणाज्"

+++
The offspring here referred to (though mentioned by a masculine noun)
stands for the *child in general*, just as in the case of such
assertions as ‘*garbhe gṛhṇāṭi*,’ ‘*gorbhe jātaḥ*’ and so forth. The
sense of the verse thus comes to be this:—‘A maiden born from a *Śūdra*
woman to a Brāhmaṇa father,—if she is ‘*wedded to*’—acquires the
capacity for bearing children, by becoming conjoined in wedlock to—a
person of a superior caste *i.e*., the Brāhmaṇa,—and the girl born of
this maiden is again married to a Brāhmaṇa,—and this goes on for seven
generations, then in the seventh generation, the child that is born
becomes a regular Brāhmaṇa.’

Though the text speaks of the ‘*superior caste*’ in general, yet it
should be taken as meaning that the *Śūdra* attains the position of the
Brāhmaṇa; and this because the Brāhmaṇa is mentioned in the text, and
also because the next verse speaks of the Śūdra attaining the *position
of the Brāhmaṇa*.

On the principle enunciated here, the child born from the Vaiśya mother
(and the Brāhmaṇa hither) attains the superior caste in the fifth
generation; and that born from the *Kṣatriya* mother, in the third
generation.

In all these cases the ‘superiority’ is in comparison to the caste of
the *mother*. So that if the girl born to a Vaiśya father from a Śūdra
mother is married to a Vaiśya, she attains the superior caste in the
*third* generation; and the girl born of the Śūdra mother to the
*Kṣatriya* hither, on marrying the Kṣatriya, acquires the higher caste
in the *fifth* generation. The term ‘*yuga*’ here stands for *birth*,
*generation*.

The ‘*inferior*’—one belonging to a lower caste—attains the
‘*superior*’—the higher caste.

The article ‘*ā*’ (in the expression ‘*ā* *saptamāt*’) indicates
*limit*.—(64)


