+++
title = "082 उभाभ्याम् अप्य्"

+++
‘*If he is unable to subsist by these two occupations*.’ The text is
meant to lay clown a distinct order of sequence; at first he is to
adopt, the occupation of the caste next to him, and then that of the
caste removed a degree further.

The mention of ‘*agriculture and cattle-tending*’ is meant to stand for
all the occupations of the Vaiśya. That is why *trading* is also
permitted, in view of which the author is going to forbid (in 85, *et.
seq*.) the selling of certain things by the Brāhmaṇa.

‘*He may live the living of the Vaiśya*—The two acts (denoted by the
terms ‘live’ and ‘living’) are spoken of as cause and effect,—one
standing for the general act of *living*, and the other for the special
forms of living.

Some people have held that from among the occupations of the Vaiśya,
agriculture, trade, and money-lending have been permitted (for the
Brāhmaṇa) even during normal times,—just like Teaching and other
occupations—under verses 4.5 and 6. In Gautama (10.5 and 6) also we
read—‘Agriculture and trade done by himself, as also money-lending’;
which permits the carrying on of agriculture and trade by the Brāhmaṇa
himself.

As for the view that these stand on the same footing as Teaching and
other occupations (of the Brāhmaṇa himself),—this has been refuted by us
already. If agriculture and other occupations of the Vaiśya stood for
all three castes, on exactly the same footing,—then, why should ‘trade,
cattle-tending and agriculture’ have been mentioned as the most useful
occupation ‘*for* *the Vaiśya*’ (verse 79)? And for the Brāhmaṇa and the
Kṣatriya also, these should not have been mentioned as to be adopted
only under the stress of want of livelihood; in fact they should have
been mentioned along with ‘Teaching, sacrificing for others and
receiving gifts from pure men’ (76) \[which have been mentioned as the
special occupations of the Brāhmaṇa\].

The conclusion therefore is that so long as the Brāhmaṇa can make a
living by teaching and the other occupations laid down for himself,
agriculture and the rest are forbidden to him. As regards the texts (4.
5 and 6) permitting these latter for the Brāhmaṇa, the real meaning of
this we have already explained under those texts.—(82)


