+++
title = "088 अपः शस्त्रम्"

+++
‘*Weapons*’—Swords, nooses and so forth.

‘*Perfume*.’— Such special fragrant substances as the ‘*Tagara*,’ the
‘*Uśīra*’, *Sandalwood* and so forth; the term ‘*gandha*’ being
explained in the same manner as the word ‘*rasa*’ above.

‘*Milk*’—Everything made of milk, as described in other ‘*Smṛti texts*’
such as sour cream, whey, co-agulated milk and so forth;—all these
should not be sold. ‘*Curd*’ and ‘*butter*’ have been mentioned
separately with a view to indicate the special importance of these among
all milk—products.

‘*Madhu*’ stands for ‘*madhūcchiṣṭa*’ bees-wax,—the part (‘*madhu*’)
standing for the whole ‘*madhūcchiṣṭa*.’ Just as ‘*deva*’ is generally
used for ‘*devadatta*.’ That this is so follows from the fact that it is
the selling of the ‘*bees-wax*’ that is expressly forbidden in another
*Smṛti*; and as for *honey* (Madhu) itself, it is forbidden in the
present text by the special name ‘*Kṣaudra*’,—the *grape-juice* (which
also is called ‘*kṣaudra*,’ being expressly forbidden in a later verse
under the name ‘*madya*.’

Others however explain the term ‘*madhu*’ in the present verse as
standing for *grape-juice* before fermentation has set in and it has
become ‘*wine*,’ ‘*madya*.’

This however is not right. Because the word ‘*madhu*’ is not denotative
of the freshly extracted *grape-juice*; in fact it always stands for it
in the form of wine; as we find in such passages as ‘*Ubhau
madhvāsavakṣibau*,’ where intoxication is spoken of as brought about by
‘*madhu*,’ and it is only *wine* that brings about intoxication.

‘*Sugar*’.—This has been mentioned with a view to show that the
prohibition of this could not come under that of “*r* *asa*’ (under 86).
Others however explain that this has been added with a view to imply
that the selling of things made of sugar—such as sweetmeats—is
permitted.—(88)


