+++
title = "091 भोजनाभ्यञ्जनाद् दानाद्"

+++
In connection with the prohibition of the selling of sesamum except
under the said conditions, we have this declamatory statement.

“It has been declared that the mention of the wrong involved in the
doing of what is forbidden is the purpose served by declamatory
assertions; why then should the declamatory statement in the present
ease be put forward in the form—‘He becomes a worm if he does anything
else with sesamum than eating, anointing and giving?’”

The answer to this is as follows:—This has been asserted in this form
because the result spoken of is one that is impossible and also contrary
to what has been asserted in other treatises. For instance, it is said
here that the man plunges into ordure ‘*along with his ancestors*,’—and
certainly no wrong is committed by these ancestors; the results of good
and bad acts always accrue to the man that does them; in no sense could
the ancestors be the persons that did the act in question; all which has
been already discussed before. Then again, it is said below (in 92)
that—‘by selling meat he at once becomes an outcaste’; where becoming an
out-caste could not apply to any one else except the seller himself.
From all this it is clear that all that is meant to be really related to
the prohibition is that something undesirable happens; and the words of
the text cannot be taken as literally true. Hence what is meant is that
‘the man who does anything else—in the shape of selling and the
like—with sesamum than eating and the rest, *becomes a worm*,—*i.e*.,
becomes tainted with the evil effects described.’—(91)


