+++
title = "103 नाऽध्यापनाद् याजनाद्"

+++
The preceding verse having permitted the receiving of improper gifts,
the present verse permits the *teaching* and *sacrificing* (of
unqualified persons). The epithet ‘*reprehensible*’ is applicable both
ways, according to the maxim of the ‘Lion’s glance.’

As Fire and Water, so Brāhmaṇas, are everywhere pure. This is the eulogy
bestowed on the Brāhmaṇa.

Some people have held the following view:—“If, like the receiving of
gifts from improper persons, the Teaching and Sacrificing for improper
persons were meant to be permitted, men, those also would have been
mentioned in the preceding verse, just as the Receiving of Gifts. As a
matter of fact, however, since there is no idea of *injunction* in the
present verse, sin would certainly attach to Brāhmaṇas (for doing these
two acts); for the presence of the Present Tense clearly indicates that
the text speaks of a settled fact, and, as such, is purely declamatory.
Then again, since every injunction has a corresponding declamatory
declaration, the mention of Teaching and Sacrificing in a sentence which
is syntactically connected with a foregoing injunction, is certainly
open to being regarded as declamatory.”

Our opinion however is that when even gifts from improper persons are
not available, the Brāhmaṇa may have recourse to the said Teaching and
Sacrificing also; since what the text is providing for is the man’s
subsistence; and it has been declared that ‘one should maintain himself
by some means or the other, excepting of course the heinous crimes.’ And
it is only with a view to their being performed that the said acts have
been mentioned in the section dealing with ‘Abnormal Times.’—(103)


