+++
title = "115 सप्त वित्तागमा"

+++
^(‘)*Inheritance*’—Hereditary property.

‘*Acquisition*’—of buried treasure and such things; or the share that
one obtains out of the property acquired by his father and other
relations. Though this also would be *inherited* from the father, yet it
cannot be spoken of as ‘inheritance,’ because it belongs in common to
many persons. This is why we find in another Smṛti the declaration
regarding ‘property assigned for maintenance’ (*Yājñavalkya*, 2.121). Or
‘*acquisition*’ may stand for those loving presents that one receives
from his friends, or from his father-in-law.

‘*Purchase*.’—This is well known.

^(‘)*Conquest*’—in battle.

‘*Investment and Industry*’—Money-lending and trade. The legality of
these is in accordance with the caste of the person concerned. The first
three of them are common to all; *Conquest* is for the Kṣatriya only;
*Investment and Industry* for the Vaiśya only; and *Receiving of proper
gifts* for the Brāhmaṇa only. All this distinction is based upon
theories and arguments already set forth above.

Some people object to ‘Purchase’ (being a source of income).

But this is not right. As it it were not lawful, all transactions would
come to an end.

Some people hold that ‘Conquest’ refers to gambling-stakes only, and as
such pertains to all castes.

This also is not right; since another *Smṛti* has clearly declared that
wealth acquired by gambling is ‘impure’; specially where Pāraskara
speaks of Gambling.

Similarly some people explain ‘*prayoga*’ as meaning *action*, on the
ground of such usage as ‘*jñānapūrvakaḥ prayogaḥ*,’ ‘action preceded by
knowledge,’—where the word *prayoga*’ is used in the sense of *action*.
On the same analogy ‘*karmaprayoga*’ will mean the *employment of
action*.—(115)


