+++
title = "126 न शूद्रे"

+++
The whole of this verse is purely reiterative.

Whatever is not directly forbidden for the Śūdra by actual name,—*e.g*.,
such acts as injuring living things, stealing, lying, and so forth,
which form the subject-matter of general prohibitions (without reference
to any particular castes),—by doing these the Śūdra does not incur sin.
Guilt does accrue to him in the case of acts that are expressly
prohibited for him,—such acts, for instance, as injuring, stealing and
so forth.

‘*He is not worthy of sacraments*’—such as Initiation and the like; all
which have been prescribed for the ‘three twice-born castes.’

Similarly, ‘*he is not entitled to the sacred rites*’;—that is, such
acts as bathing, fasting and worshipping of deities are not enjoined as
his compulsory duties; and hence the omission of these does not involve
sin.

‘*There is no prohibition against sacred rites*’—Even with regard to
bathing, fasting and such acts, which are not among his compulsory
duties, and the omission whereof does not involve sin,—there is no
absolute prohibition; *i.e*., the performance of such acts is not
actually forbidden to him. So that if he does perforin them, it is
conducive to his welfare; this on the analogy of the principle that
‘avoidance is conducive to great results.’

Similarly his not eating garlic and such things should also be
understood to be conducive to welfare; as the law ‘avoidance is
conducive to great results’ is meant to be of universal application.

This is what is meant by the words that ‘*there is no prohibition
against sacred rites*’

If the man does perform the acts—(what should be done is laid down in
the following verse).—(126)


