+++
title = "127 धर्मेप्सवस् तु"

+++
This is what the text proceeds to point out.

‘*Desiring to acquire merit*’—seeking for spiritual welfare.

‘*Imitate the practice of righteous men*’— betake themselves to the
performance of acts done by good men;—‘*with the exception of reciting
sacred texts*’—‘*they incur no guilt*.’ That is to say, they do not
incur any guilt, if they perform such acts as fasting for a day,
worshipping of gods, bowing to elders and Brāhmaṇas—all which are done
by good men; in fact ‘*they obtain praise*’— as the distinct result of
their act.

It will not be right to entertain the following notion—“the Śūdra incurs
no guilt if he performs, without reciting the sacred texts, the
*Darśa-pūrṇamāsa* and other rites, which are performed by twice-born men
with the sacred texts.” Because these acts having been prescribed as to
be done with sacred texts, if they are done without these texts, this
would be distinctly contrary to the scriptures.

The exact significance of the phrase ‘*with the exception of inciting
the sacred texts*’ has been already explained.

Says the revered Vyāsa—‘It is certain that the Śūdra does not become an
outcast, nor is he worthy of sacraments; he is not entitled to the
sacred rites prescribed in the *Smṛtis*; nor is any prohibition laid
down against the sacred rites.

This also is only reiterative of what has been enjoined elsewhere.

The Śūdra does not become an outcast by eating garlic or drinking wine.

What is meant by his being ‘*not worthy of sacraments*’ has been already
explained. It has been pointed out that, inasmuch as the Initiatory Rite
has not been performed for him, the performance of the Śrauta rites is
not open to him; but there is no prohibition against his performing
those rites that are prescribed in the *Smṛtis* as to be performed by
all men. To this end we have other *Smṛti texts*—‘He shall perform the
Pākayajña rites’ (*Gautama*, 4.65),—‘Salutation also, without sacred
texts, is permitted for him’ (*Ibid*. 4.64).

Some people have remarked that—“the *Śūdra is* only partially entitled
to the performance of such rites as the *Āvasathyādhāna* (the kindling
of the Household Fire), the *Pārvaṇa*, the *Vaiśvadeva*, the *Pākayajña*
and so forth.”

But we do not understand what these men mean. By the Gṛhya-writers the
*Āvasathyādhāna* has been prescribed distinctly for the three higher
castes; by manu and other Smṛti-writers it has not been prescribed at
all; all that they say is—‘they should perform the Gṛhya rites in the
marriage-fire’ (Manu, 3.67). So being nowhere laid down, whence could
there be any such *ādhāna* for the Śūdra? If it be held that the rite of
kindling fire is implied by the injunction of the *Pākayajña*
rites,—this also is not possible; since the Vaiśvadeva offerings (of the
*Pākayajña*) could be done in the ordinary fire. In fact in all these
matters, we have to accept only what is distinctly laid down in the
texts, and it is not right to draw inferences. All this has been
explained in connection with the term ‘marriage-fire’ (under 3.67).

By the term ‘*Pārvaṇa*’, if it is the *Śrāddha* that is meant, then we
admit this, since the *Aṣṭakā*, the *Pārvaṇa-śrāddha* and the
*Vaiśvadeva* offerings have all been prescribed for the Śūdra also. If
however the performance of the *Darśa-pūrṇamāsa* be meant, this wo have
already refuted.—(127)


