+++
title = "001 विद्वद्भिः सेवितः"

+++
The First Discourse was undertaken for the purpose of showing the real
character of the subject-matter dealt with by the Treatise; the
description of the creation of the World and such other subjects have
also been explained as supplementary to the said delineation of the
subject-matter of the Treatise. It is now that the Treatise actually
begins. As the promised subject of the Discourse, interrupted by the
description of world-creation and such other subjects, may have been
lost sight of,—the Teacher again addresses his pupils with a view to
recall the subject to their minds.

That ‘Dharma,’ which you desired to learn is now being expounded by
me,—please now ‘*learn*,’—*i.e*., be attentive and listen.

In Discourse I, five or six verses (85—91) were meant to point out the
purpose of the Treatise; the rest of it is mere ‘declamatory
description’ (*Arthavāda*). So that, if all that has not been carefully
learnt, there is not much harm; in the present Discourse however
‘Dharma’ itself is being directly expounded; hence this subject should
be carefully learnt. This is the meaning of the re-iteration (in this
verse, of *Dharma* being the subject-matter of the Treatise).

The term ‘*dharma*,’ as already explained, denotes *the performance of
the Aṣṭakā* and such other prescribed acts. External philosophers regard
as ‘*dharma*’ also such acts as the *wearing of ashes, the carrying of
begging-bowls*, and so forth;—and it is with a view to exclude these
from the category of ‘*Dharma*’ that the author adds the
qualifications—‘*followed by the learned*,’and so forth.

The ‘*learned*’ are those whose minds have been cultured by the study of
the sciences; those that are capable of discerning the real character of
the means of knowledge and the objects of knowledge. The ‘learned’
(meant here) are those who know the real meaning of the Veda, and not
others. In fact those persons that admit sources other than the Veda to
be the ‘means of knowledge’ in regard to *Dharma* are ‘unlearned,’
‘ignorant’; in as much as their notions of the means and objects of
knowledge are wrong. That this is so, we learn thoroughly from *Mīmāmsā*
(Sūtra, Adhyāya I).

The ‘*Good*,’—*i.e*., righteous men; those who translate into action
what is known from authoritative sources, and who always try to obtain
what is wholesome and avoid what is not wholesome;—what is ‘wholesome’
and ‘not wholesome’ among visible things is well known; among the
‘Unseen,’ that which forms the subject of ‘Injunction’ is ‘wholesome,’
while that which forms the subject of ‘prohibition’ is ‘not wholesome.’
Those who are outside the said pale of acting in accordance with the
said authoritative sources of knowledge are called ‘not good’
(unrighteous). It is for these reasons that both *knowledge* and
*acting* have been mentioned here (by means of the two epithets,
‘learned’ and ‘good’).

It is not possible for the term ‘*saṭ'* (in ‘*sadbhiḥ*’) to be taken in
the sense of *existing at the present time*; because in this sense the
epithet would be entirely superfluous: when a certain thing is
‘followed’ by one, it is only when this latter *exists* at the time \[so
that *existence* would be already implied by the other epithet.\]

By ‘*following*’ in the present context is meant capability of acting
(in conformity with). The Past-participial affix (in ‘*sevitaḥ*,’
‘followed’) indicates the fact of the *Dharma* having been in force from
times without beginning. As a matter of fact, such *Dharma* as consists
of the *Aṣṭakā* and other rites are not, like ordinary *Dharmas* or
Duties, set up by any person during the present time. This same fact is
also indicated by the term ‘ever.’ (The sense is that) this *Dharma* has
continued ever since the world-process has been going on. All other
extraneous *Dharmas*, being set up by ignorant and wicked persons,
though they may obtain currency for some time, drop out in course of
time; no mere delusion can continue for thousands of ages. True
knowledge on the other hand, even though it may for a time be shrouded
by ignorance, shines forth in all its brilliance, upon the destruction
of that ignorance. Being by its very nature, pure and brilliant, it can
never undergo entire destruction.

‘*Who are free from love and hate*’—What is referred to here is another
cause that leads men to take to heterodox *dharmas*. ‘Delusion’ having
been already described (as leading to the same end), the present phrase
serves to indicate greed and the rest; the direct mention of ‘love and
hate’ being meant to be only illustrative; *e.g*., it is by reason of
Greed that people have recourse to magical incantations and rites. Or
‘Greed’ may he regarded as included (not merely indicated) by ‘Love and
Hate.’ People who are too much addicted to what brings pleasure to
themselves, on finding themselves unable to carry on their living by
other means, are found to have recourse to such means of livelihood as
the assuming of hypocritical guises and so forth. This has been thus
described—‘The wearing of ashes and carrying of begging bowls, being
naked, wearing of discoloured clothes—these form the means of living for
people devoid of intelligence and energy.’

‘*Hate*,’—leads to the performance of acts contrary to those prescribed.
People filled with hate are not quite capable of comprehending the
truth; and hence they come to regard the wrong act (*adharma*) as the
right one (*dharma*).

Or, both ‘Love’ and ‘Hate’ may be regarded as obstacles to the
discernment of truth. As a matter of fact, even when some slight
knowledge of the scriptures has been acquired, and the man has acquired
the name of being ‘learned,’—there is every possibility of his acting
otherwise (than in strict accordance with the scriptures), if he happens
to be under the influence of love or hate. For instance, people, though
fully conversant with the scriptures, do commit such wrong acts as the
giving of false evidence, with a view either to do harm to some one whom
he hates, or to do good to some one whom he loves, and certainly one
cannot be sure that such acting of these people is based upon the Veda;
for the simple reason that there are present other forces (controlling
his action), in the shape of Love and Hate. It is for this reason that
these are prohibited.

The following objection is hero put forward:—“In the word ‘*sadbhiḥ*,’
the term ‘*saṭ*’ has been explained as denoting *righteousness*; but
what sort of *righteousness* could belong to the man for whom it is
considered possible to do wrong under the influence of Love and Hate?
Consequently, it is not necessary to add the epithet ‘free from love and
hate’ (this being already implied by the word ‘good’).”

\[Our answer to the above is as follows\]—As a matter of fact, the
epithet in question (‘*free from love and hate*’) is mentioned as the
reason or ground (of the aforementioned ‘goodness’ or ‘righteousness’);
the sense being that ‘it is because they are free from Love and Hate
that they are *good*.’

What is really meant is the absence of *undue predominance* of Love and
Hate (and not absolute *absence*); because no man, even though there be
forces at work tending to make him free from Love and Hate, can get rid
of these entirely, as declared by *Śruti* (Chāndogya Upaniṣad,
8-12-1)—‘So long as one has a body, there can be no cessation of the
agreeable and the disagreeable.’

‘*Love*’ here stands for hankering after the enjoyment of things; and
‘Hate’ is that which leads one to avoid or escape from a certain thing.
‘Greed’ is the jealous hankering after the sole possession of an object;
the feeling being in the form ‘may all this prosperity, fame and the
like not belong to any other person.’ All these are functions of the
Mind. Or, ‘Love’ may be taken as standing for the affection one feels
towards sentient beings, like one’s wife, son, relations and so forth;
and ‘greed’ for the longing that one has for riches and such insentient
things.

‘*By the heart*.’—‘Heart’ here stands for the Mind;—‘*sanction*’ is
satisfaction of mind. The real condition of things is this: *Buḍḍhi* and
other principles are located inside the Heart; and even though deluded
persons have recourse to such unrighteous acts as the killing of animals
apart from sacrifices, the eating of prohibited food and so
forth,—thinking them to be right ‘Dharma,’—yet they have compunctions in
their hearts; in the case of the performance of actions prescribed in
the Veda, on the other hand, the Mind feels satisfied.

The sense of all this is as follows:—‘The *Dharma* that I am going to
expound is not one beset with the said defects;—it is one that is
actually followed by high-souled persons and towards which the Mind
itself urges us. For these reasons it is only right that great regard
should be paid to the *Dharmas* that are going to be propounded.’

Or, ‘*Heart*’ may be taken as standing for the *Veda*; the Veda, duly
studied and borne within the heart in the form of ideas and conceptions,
is called ‘heart.’

The present statement refers to the following three cases:—(1) when a
person, without much thought, undertakes an action, through sheer
impulse,—it must be right; this is what is meant by ‘sanctioned by the
heart’;—(2) the same expression also includes the case when one acts
according to custom, depending upon the dictum ‘that is the right path
by which great men have gone’;—(3) when ‘learned’ persons, without any
ulterior motives, are found to act in a certain manner they are never
blamed for it, and even when people do not find their action authorised
(by the Veda), they accept the fact that it must be based upon the Veda.
In every way the present verse makes men have recourse to activity.

Other people explain this verse as serving the purpose of providing a
general definition of ‘Dharma’; the sense being—‘that which is done by
such persons should be regarded as *Dharma*’; this definition is
applicable to all forms of *Dharma*,—that which is directly prescribed
by the *Veda*, that which is laid down in the *Smṛti* and also that
which is got at from Right Usage. In accordance with this explanation,
however, the right reading would be—‘*yaḥ elaih sevyate tam dharmam
nibodhata*.’


