+++
title = "003 सङ्कल्प-मूलः कामो"

+++
Thought is the root of sacrifice and other acts, as also of desire; when
a man is going to perform a sacrifice, or any act, he must *think* of
it: and when the thinking has been done, there must follow, from the
said Thinking, Desire,—however undesirable this latter may be; for
instance, when a man, going to cook, lights fire, there arises, from the
fire, the undesirable smoke also. Thus it is impossible that sacrifices
should be performed and there should be no desire at all.

*Question*.—“What is this *Thought*, which is the root of all action?”

*Answer*.—We explain it as follows:—*Thought* is that function of the
mind which precedes Desire and Resolution; all these three are functions
of the mind, and they are at the root of all activity. As a matter of
fact, no physical activity is possible without Thought. What happens in
the case of all activity is that—(*a*) first of all we have the Thought
or Idea of the exact nature of a thing, and what is meant by ‘Thought,’
in the present context is the cognition that one h as of a certain thing
as capable of accomplishing a definite desirable purpose;—(*b*) after
this follows a longing, a wish; and this is ‘desire’;—(*c*) after the
*desire* has arisen in the form ‘how may I obtain it,’ the man
*resolves*, determines, that *he shall act* (towards the obtaining of
the thing); and this is ‘*Resolution*.’ It is only after these three
mental operations have been gone through that the man proceeds to that
external activity which would accomplish the desired end. For instance,
when a man is hungry, (*a*) he thinks of—has the idea of—the action of
eating,—(*b*) then he *desires* ‘may I eat,’—(*c*) then comes the
*resolution* ‘I shall desist from all other activity and take to
eating,’—(*d*) then he says to the persons in charge of the place where
the act of eating is to be done—‘make ready,’ ‘set the kitchen going.’
\[ *Objection* \]—“If this is so, then Sacrifices and other acts *do
not* proceed from mere *Thought*, but from Thought, Longing and
Resolution; then why is it said that *Sacrifices proceed from Thought*?”

\[ *Answer* \]—There is no force in this objection, since Thought is the
prime cause. It is in view of this that the author is going to assert
(in the next verse) that ‘there is no action done by one who is entirely
without desires.’

*Votes*—A ‘vow’ consists in a mental resolve, in the form ‘this shall be
done by me as long as I live’; to this class belong the vows of the
*Snātaka*.

*Restraints*—are negative in their character,—such as *desisting from,
killing* and so forth.

\[The meaning of all this is that\] without thought there is neither
activity towards what ought to be done, nor desisting from what is
prohibited and ought not to be done.”—(3)


