+++
title = "005 तेषु सम्यग्"

+++
To the above *Pūrvapakṣa*, the Author replies in this verse.

\[What is meant is that\] one should behave *in the right manner in
regard to these*—desires.

“What is this *right behaviour*?”

It consists in doing an act exactly in the manner in which it is found
mentioned in the scriptures. That is, in regard to the compulsory acts
one should not think of rewards at all, for the simple reason that no
rewards have been mentioned in connection with them; while in regard to
the voluntary acts, there is no prohibition of thinking of rewards, for
the simple reason that these acts are actually mentioned as bringing
definite rewards; in fact what we know of these acts from the scriptural
injunctions is that they are the means of obtaining certain rewards; so
that the performance of these by a man who has no desire for those
rewards would be doing something that is not enjoined in the scriptures
at all. As regards the compulsory acts however, to think of rewards
would be a pure mistake; for when the acts have not been prescribed as
leading to any results, no results could proceed from them by merely the
man’s seeking for them.

By doing so \[ *i.e*., by behaving rightly in regard to desires\] one
*goes to*—attains—*the position of Immortals*. ‘Immortals’ are the Gods;
their ‘position’ is Heaven; and by reason of the Gods residing in
Heaven, the term ‘position’ is applied to the gods themselves, the
*position* being identified with the *occupier of the position*; just as
we have in the expression ‘the elevated sheds are shouting’ \[where the
‘sheds’ stand for the men occupying them\]. Hence the compound
‘*Amaraloka*’ is to be expounded as a *Karmadhāraya*—‘the immortal
positions’; and with the abstract affix ‘*tat'* we have the form
‘*amaralokatā*’ So the meaning is that ‘he obtains the character of a
divine being,’ ‘he attains divinity.’ The author has made use of this
expression in view of metrical exigencies.

Or, the compound ‘*amaralokatā*’ may he explained as *one who
sees*—‘*lokayati*’—*the gods*—‘*amarān*’; the term ‘*loka*’ being
derived from the root ‘*loka*’ with the passive affix ‘*aṇ*’ (according
to Pāṇini 3.2.1); and then the abstract affix *tal* added to it; so that
the meaning is that ‘he becomes capable of seeing the Gods’; and this
also means that he attains heaven.

Or again, the expression may mean that ‘he is looked upon as a
God’—‘*amara iva lokyate*’—among men.

This whole passage is mere declamatory Arthavāda; and if does not lay
down Heaven as the result actually following from the action spoken of;
because as a matter of fact, the compulsory acts do not lead to any
results at all, while the voluntary acts are prescribed as leading to
diverse results. So that what the ‘attaining of heaven’ spoken of in the
text means is the due fulfilment of what is enjoined in the scriptures;
which is only an indirect way of saying that ‘that particular end is
attained with a view to which the action was done.’ Thus in the case of
the compulsory acts, the end in view would be either the avoiding of the
sin (that might be incurred by the omission of the act), or the due
fulfilment of what has been enjoined in the scriptures; and in the case
of the voluntary acts, the end is the attaining of *rewards thought of,
i.e*., those contemplated as mentioned in the scriptures; when a man is
going to perform an act, he thinks, in his mind, of that reward which
has been mentioned in the scriptures as following from that act; having
thought of that reward, he has a desire for it—‘May I obtain this reward
by the doing of this act’; and then he obtains *all those
desires*—*i.e*., the desirable things.

In the manner above described we have set aside the difficulty (that had
been set up by the Pūrvapakṣa); for what the text prohibits is not the
desire for each and everything, but the entertaining of desires only in
connection with the compulsory acts; and in regard to these also there
must be desire for the obtaining of things necessary for the due
performance of them.

The *Brahmavādins* (Vedāntins) however regard the words ‘it is not right
to be absorbed in desires’ as a prohibition of the *Saurya* and all such
other acts as are laid down as bringing rewards; and their reason is
that all actions done with a view to rewards become setters of bondage;
and it is only when an act is done without any thought of rewards—doing
it simply as an offering to Brahman—that the man becomes released. This
is what the revered Kṛṣṇa-Dvaipāyana has declared in the words (*a*)
‘May there be no action done with a view to rewards’ (*Bhagavadgītā*,
2.47),—and again, ‘The perform nce of an act becomes vitiated, (*a*) by
the incompleteness of accessories, (*b*) by the illiteracy of the
performer, and (*c*) by the thought of rewards.’

Various explanations have been offered of the present verse; but we have
omitted them because they are of no importance.


