+++
title = "008 सर्वन् तु"

+++
‘*All this*’—all tilings that can be known, those that are created as
well as those that are uncreated (eternal); all that is dealt with in
the scriptures, what is amenable to perception and other ordinary means
of knowledge, and also what is not so amenable.

‘*Having perceived with* *the* *of knowledge*’—in the shape of the
learning of and pondering over the various sciences of Reasoning,
Grammar, Philology, Mīmāmsā and the rest. The study of the scriptures is
called the ‘eye’ in the sense that it is *like* the eye, in being the
instrument of knowledge; the similitude being that ‘Dharma is known by
means of scriptures in the same way as Colour is known by means of the
Eye.’

‘*Honing perceived*’—*i.e*., after having ascertained by means of due
consideration.

‘*Resting upon the authority* *of* *the Revealed Word*.’—*i.e*., in
accordance with the authority of the Veda.

‘*Should enter upon his duties*’—*i.e*., perform his *dharma*.

After all the sciences have been studied, the trustworthy character
becomes fully established, which is not done until the sciences have
been duly studied. When a man carefully ponders over the sciences, he
comes to the conclusion that there are no grounds for believing in the
authority of these sciences, while there are reasons for trusting the
authority of the Veda.

‘*Sarvam*,’ ‘*all*,’ qualifies all that is to be known; and
‘*nikhilam*,’ ‘*fully*,’ is an adverb modifying the participle
‘*samavekṣya*,’ ‘*having perceived*,’—‘*Having fully
perceived*,’—*i.e*., (1) having stated, in the form of the *primâ*
*facie* Argument, all possible semi-arguments in support of the view
that the other sciences are authoritative,—or that the Veda is not
authoritative,—(2) having refuted those arguments by means of perfectly
valid reasonings based upon the established theory,—when one states his
own finally considered view, the final conclusion arrived at is that
*the Veda is authoritative*;—all this is what is implied by the term
‘fully.’ Thus though the term ‘*sarva*’ and ‘*nikhila*’ are synonyms,
yet since they serve two distinct purposes, they are not regarded as
being a needless repetition.

The term ‘*sva*,’ ‘*own*’ is purely explanatory; what is the ‘duty’ of
one man is not the ‘duty’ of another.—(8)


