+++
title = "011 यो ऽवमन्येत"

+++
On the ground of ‘untruthfulness’ and ‘unreliability’ *if a twice-born
person, relying upon the science of dialectics* the ‘science of
dialectics’ here stands for the polemical works written by Atheists,
treatises of *Bauddhas* and *Charvākas*, in which it is repeatedly
proclaimed that “the Veda is conducive to sin”;—relying upon such a
science, if one should scorn the Veda; *i.e*., when advised by some one
to desist from a certain course of action which is sinful according to
the Veda and the Smṛti, in the words—‘Do not do this, it is prohibited
by the Veda,’—if he disregards this advice and persists in doing it,
saying, ‘what if it is prohibited in the Veda or in the Smṛtis? They are
not at all authoritative’;—even without saying this, if he should even
think in this manner,—and if he is found to pay much attention to the
science of dialectics;—such a person *should he cast out by the
good*—despised by all cultured persons—out of such acts as ‘officiating
at sacrifices,’ ‘teaching,’ ‘honours of a guest’ and so forth. Since the
text does not specify the acts (from which the man should be kept out),
it follows that he should be kept out of all those acts that are fit for
the learned. And the reason for this lies in the fact that it is only
the ignorant man, whose mind is uncultured and who smacks of the
polemic, that can speak as above (in deprecation of the Veda); and to
the said acts (of officiating, etc.) it is only the learned man that can
be entitled. It is in view of this that such ‘criticism’ has been
prohibited in the preceding verse,—such criticism being due to want or
respect,—and it does not deprecate such inquiry as might be instituted
for the purpose of elucidating the true meaning of the Veda.

It is in view of all this that the author states the reason for what he
has asserted—‘*The* *detractor of the Veda* *being an infidel*.’ Thus
the man, who would set forth arguments in support of the view that ‘the
Veda is unauthoritative,’ only by way of a *primâ* *facie* statement,
would not he an ‘infidel’; because such statement of the arguments would
he made only for the purpose of strengthening the final conclusion (that
the Veda is authoritative).

The text speaking of tin; ‘*detractor of the Veda*,’ has not mentioned
the *Smṛti*; hut the idea is that both stand on the same footing, and
both equally form the subject-matter of the context; hence the mention
of any one of them implies both.

Some people might however take the term ‘Veda’ (in the expression
‘detractor of the Veda’) to be actually restricted to the *Veda only*,
and they would thence conclude that ‘the detractor of *Smṛtis*’ should
not be cast out, the casting out in this verse being declared for the
‘detractor of the Veda’ only. With a view to such people the Author adds
the following verse.—(11)


