+++
title = "013 अर्थ-कामेष्व् असक्तानाम्"

+++
‘*Wealth*’ stands for cattle, land, gold and so forth, and ‘*addiction*’
to it means being entirely taken up with the undertaking of cultivation,
service, etc., for the purpose of acquiring and accumulating wealth.

‘*Pleasures*’ stands for *sexual pleasures*; and ‘addiction’ to these
means constant recourse to it, as also to its accompaniments in the
shape of singing and music, etc.

For people who are devoid of these (wealth and pleasures), ‘*the
knowledge of Dharma*,’ the true understanding of *Dharma*, ‘*is
ordained*,’ specially propounded, accomplished; the verb ‘*vidhīyate*’
is derived from the root ‘*dhīṅ*’ to *accomplish*.

*Objection*.—How is it that people addicted to wealth and pleasures can
have no knowledge of ‘*Dharma*?’ In fact such persons also, as time
permits them, can obtain some knowledge of ‘*Dharma*,’—by listening at
the time of eating and at such times as do not interfere with their
pursuit of wealth and pleasure, to stories and to the precept or example
of others (who know *Dharma*).”

In view of the above objection, the author has added the words—‘*for
those who seek the knowledge of Dharma,’ etc*. The chief authority for
*Dharma* is the Veda; and the Veda can never be understood by the
persons referred to. It is extremely difficult to comprehend and for its
due comprehension it requires the thorough study of the sciences of
*Nigama* (Vedic commentaries), *Nirukla* (Philology), *Vyākaraṇa*
(Grammar), *Tarka* (Logic) *Purāṇa* (History) and *Mīnāmsā* (Exigetics).
And this entire mass of literature can never be acquired by a man unless
he renounces all other activities. What can be learnt from stories and
examples are only a few stray *Dharmas*, and not the entire body of
Dharma, in the shape of the performance of the *Jyotiṣṭoma* and other
sacrifices, along with all its accessory details, which can be learnt
only from the Veda and the other sources of Dharma. It is in view of all
this that the text says—‘*the Revealed Word is the highest authority*.’
This how ever is not meant to take away the force of ‘Example’ as a
source of knowledge.

What is stated in the text is corroborated by the following well-known
saying—‘He alone acquires learning who shuns wealth like snake,
sweetmeats like poison, and women like evil spirits?



\[ *Another explanation of the verse*.\]

According to others again the expression ‘*arthakāma*’ stands for
*hankering after visible rewards*—and for people ‘addicted’ to
these,—those who hanker after honour, fame, etc., and who, seeking after
visible results, have no other end in life save worldly advancement—‘the
knowledge of Dharma,’ *i.e*., ‘performance of Dharma,’—is not
‘ordained,’ taught. The term ‘*jñāna*’ (’knowledge’) stands for’that in
which the act becomes recognised’ (*jñāyate asmin*), *i.e*., its
performance; it is only when the *Dharma* is performed that it becomes
clearly manifest, clearer indeed than that comprehended at the time that
the scriptures are studied. It is for this reason that it is the
*performance* that is spoken of as ‘*jñāna*,’ ‘knowledge.’

What the text means therefore is this:—Even though the performance of
Dharma brings worldly advancement, yet one should not undertake it
entirely with a view to that fame; it should be undertaken with the sole
idea that it is prescribed by the scriptures. The act having been done
with this idea, if some visible result also follows, it may do so, but
it is not what is thought of by the man. In fact the

Veda itself describes the result following from Vedic study as ‘fame and
worldly advancement,’ in the passage—‘the world progressing endows him
with four things—honour, gifts, freedom from taxes and freedom from
death.’ To the same effect is the following saying—‘The water supplied
for the growth of sugar-cane waters also the grasses and creepers, in
the same manner when a man treads the path of *Dharma*, he also obtains
fame, pleasure and riches.’

*Objection*.—

> “When the act is endowed with a certain faculty, it does not lose that
> faculty, even though it may be performed with some other end in view;
> it must always bring about its natural effects; *e.g*., even though
> one may drink poison, with the idea that it is an efficacious
> medicine, yet it does not fail to kill him. Similarly even though the
> act may be done with a view to some visible reward, yet it cannot fail
> to bring about the invisible results mentioned in ' the scriptures.
> Why then should you have this aversion, which makes you assert that an
> act should not be undertaken with a view to worldly advancement?”

It is in view of this objection that the text adds—‘*For those seeking
for the knowledge of Dharma, the Revealed Word is the highest
authority*.’ And what this means is that ‘those who seek for visible
rewards do not obtain any invisible reward,—and it is not only that he
does not obtain the invisible result, he commits sin also by being
addicted to what is prohibited.’—(13)


