+++
title = "014 श्रुतिद्वैधन् तु"

+++
The objection urged above (in the *Bhāṣya* on Verse 10) is answered
here.

When ‘*between two Vedic texts* there is ‘*conflict*,’—*i.e*., setting
forth of contrary facts,—*e.g*., what is declared to be ‘Dharma’ by one
text is pronounced to bo ‘*adharma*’ by another;—in such cases both are
Dharma,—*i.e*., to be performed as optional alternatives. The
authoritative strength of the two texts is equal; hence it cannot bo
discerned which is reliable and which is not. Thus the conflict being
between two equally authoritative texts bearing upon the same subject,
there must be option.

*Objection*.—

> “The text speaks of *both* being *Dharma*, which means that there
> should be *combination* (and not *option*); as it is only when there
> is *combination* that *both* could be *Dharma*; otherwise (), only
> *one* of them could be *Dharma*. (at a time).”

We deny this. The use of the word ‘both’ is incompatible with separate,
performance (even acts performed one after the other, and not
conjointly, can be spoken of as ‘both’); the word does not necessarily
denote *two things taken together*.

Further, *option* is distinctly the reasonable course to adopt. The
action known as ‘*Agnihotra*’ is one only; and with reference to this
single act, three points of time have been laid down; now the *action*
forms the primary factor, the comes in only as a subordinate element;
nor is it possible to adopt all the three points of time in connection
with any single performance; nor again can it be right to repeat the
performance for the sake of the *time*; as it is never right to repeat
the primary for the sake of the secondary factor. From all this it
follows that *option* is most reasonable, as declared in the words
‘whenever there is conflict between authorities of equal force, there is
option.’ (*Gautama*, 1.3.)

‘*Both have bent proclaimed to be Dharma*.’—“What is the difference
between this statement and the former one, ‘both are Dharma’?”

There is no difference; in the former statement, the author has stated
his own opinion, and in the latter he supports his opinion by the
opinion of other teachers, by pointing out that ‘this is what has also
been proclaimed by other wise men.’—(14)


