+++
title = "015 उदिते ऽनुदिते"

+++
This is an instance of the ‘conflict’ spoken of in the preceding verse.

In regard to the offering of the Agnihotra-lilbtions, all these three
points of time have been prescribed,—and the injunction of each of these
deprecates the others; and the sense of these Vedic texts is that ‘*the
merificial act may be performed at any time*’;—in all ways the offering
proceeds, *i.e*., it should proceed. As regards the deprecation of the
offering done *after sunrise* (which is found in the text enjoining the
time before sunrise), this deprecation is not meant to be an interdict;
it is only meant to be an injunction of the offering *before sunrise*.
Similarly in the other cases. Thus what is meant is that the act may be
performed at any one of the three points of time; and the command of the
scriptures becomes fulfilled by the offering being done at any one time.

‘*Such is the pronouncement of the Veda*.’—This is what is meant by the
Vedic declaration; and it does not mean that what is deprecated is
interdicted.

The ‘*sacrificial act*’ spoken of here is what is known as the
‘*Agnihotra-homa*’; there is not much difference between ‘*yāga*’(a
sacrifice) and ‘*homa*’ (libation-pouring). When one renounces his
proprietary right over a substance in favour of a certain deity,—the
idea in his mind being ‘this belongs to the deity now, and not to
me,’—this is what constitutes ‘*yāga*’ ‘sacrifice’; and exactly the same
is the form of ‘Homa,’ ‘Pouring of libation,’ also. The only difference
is that in *Homa* there is the additional factor of the substance being
*thrown*, deposited in a specified manner, in fire or some such
receptacle. It is in view of this similarity that the *Homa* is spoken
of here as ‘*yajña*.’ That this is so is proved by the fact that the
three points of time spoken of have been prescribed in the Veda in
connection with *Homa*, and not all kinds of sacrifice.

The expressions ‘*udite*’ (‘after sunrise’) and the rest are to be taken
as parts of, and as standing for, such declarations as ‘*udite
hotavyam*’ (‘the Homa should be performed after sunrise’) and so
forth;—the construction being that ‘the meaning of the declaration that
the Homa should be performed after sunrise, not before it, etc., etc.,
is as follows.’

By the compound word ‘*samayā*’ the time of early dawn is meant. Others
have taken it as consisting of two words: ‘*samayā*’ meaning *near*,
requires its correlative in the shape of *something that is near*; and
since the two points of time mentioned in the sentence are those
‘before’ and ‘after sunrise,’ the required correlative in the present
instance is the time of *twilight*. ‘*Adhyuṣita*’ stands for *the time
of departure of the night*, and means ‘at the departure of night.’ \[So
the compound means ‘that twilight which comes after the departure of
night.’\]

The words of the text are intended to quote the words of the Veda, which
are found to be read in one form in one text, and in another form in
another text; so that whether the expression ‘*samayādhyuṣita*’ is one
word or two words can be ascertained only from the original texts.

Thus then, the same act of Homa being laid down in the Veda as to be
done *optionally* at any one of the three points of time, there is no
*inconsistency*. It is only in connection with two accomplished entities
that, when found to be incompatible with one another, they are held to
be ‘inconsistent’; the same cannot be true in connection with things
still to he accomplished \[and all actions belong to this latter
category\]. For what has got to be accomplished may be accomplished
either in one way or another; and how could there be any inconsistency
in this?

In the case of conflicting *Smṛti* -texts also, the most reasonable view
to take is that they lay down optional alternatives.—(15)


