+++
title = "016 निषेकादि-श्मशानान्तो मन्त्रैर्"

+++
In Adhyāya I (Verse 103) are found the words ‘this should be studied by
the learned Brāhmaṇa’; and though this is a mere *Arthavāda*, yet the
presence of the potential affix ‘*tavya*’ (in the term ‘*adhyetavyam*’)
might lead people into the mistake that it is an Injunction; and in that
case the Kṣatriya and Vaiśya would be precluded from the study. It is
with a view to preclude this possibility that we have the present verse,
which shows the capability of the *Kṣatriya* and the *Vaiśya* also to
study.

The older commentators have also taken this verse as serving to preclude
the possibility of the Śūdra studying the scripture, which he might be
tempted to do.

The term ‘*scripture*’ here stands for the compilation by Manu.

‘*Entitled*,’—the ‘title’ meant here consists in the idea that ‘this
should be done by me.’ But no ‘collection of words’—which is an
accomplished entity—can be regarded as ‘to be done’; nor, on the other
band, can any action be regarded as ‘to be accomplished,’ except as
related to a certain substance. Hence the ‘*title*’ is understood to
pertain to a certain action relating to the scripture. Now in the
present context, the action intended is not found to be either *making*,
or *being*, or *existing*; as for ‘being’ and ‘existing,’ they both mean
‘to be’; so that if these were the action meant, the meaning would
be—‘one should undertake the *being* or the *existing*, as related to
the scripture’; but as a matter of fact the ‘being’ of one thing cannot
be undertaken by another. The action of ‘making’ also would not be
applicable; because so far as the *words* are concerned, all are eternal
(and as such cannot be *made*); while as regards *sentences*, they have
been already *made* by another person (the author of the scripture).
From all this it follows that the action intended is that of *studying*
as pertaining to the scripture. So that the meaning comes to be
this—‘the man is entitled to the study of the scripture’; and just as to
the studying, so also to the learning of its meaning.

“In as much as the work of Manu has had a beginning in time, how could
any injunction relating to it (as the present verse is supposed to be)
be based upon the Veda, which is beginningless?”

Our answer is as follows:—It is quite open to us to infer some such
general (Vedic) injunction as that ‘the Śūdra should not study such
sentences as serve to expound the scriptures.’ Further, these statements
of the expounders of the Veda that serve to explain Vedic texts bear a
certain resemblance to these texts; and hence they are as much the
subject of a bcginningless tradition as the Vedic texts themselves.

What forms the subject-matter of the scriptures is actual *performance*,
and to this all the four castes arc entitled \[though to the *study* of
the scriptures the three twice-born castes alone are entitled\].

“If such be the case, then it would be permissible for the *Śūdra* to
perform all those acts which are prescribed in a general manner, without
reference to any specified persons.”

How this contingency does, not arise we shall show, as occasion arises.

*Objection*:—

> “When the *Śūdra* is not entitled to study the scripture and learn its
> meaning, how can he be entitled to the performance of the acts therein
> prescribed? Unless the man knows the exact form of the act, he cannot
> do it; unless he studies the scriptures, he cannot know what is
> contained in them; and no unlearned person is entitled to the
> performance of any (religious) act.”

True; but the requisite knowledge can be obtained from the advice of
other persons. The *Śūdra* may be dependent upon a Brāhmaṇa; or a
Brāhmaṇa may be doing the work of instructing people for payment; and
such a Brāhmaṇa might very well instruct the Śūdra to ‘do this, after
having done that’ and so forth. So that the mere fact of the Śūdra
performing the acts does not necessarily indicate that he is entitled to
the study and understanding of the scriptures; as performance can be
accomplished, even on the strength of what is learnt from others; as is
done in the case of women; what helps women (in the performance of their
duties) is the learning of their husbands, which becomes available to
them through companionship. Then again, the texts laying down the acts
do not imply the direct knowledge (of the injunctive texts). It is only
in the case of men, to whom is addressed the injunction of Vedic
study—contained in the words ‘one should study the Veda’—that the
performance of duties proceeds upon the basis of their own learning; and
this injunction is meant only for the *male* member’s of the three
higher castes. But in the case of these also their study and
understanding of the scriptures is not prompted by their knowledge of
what is contained in them; it is prompted entirely by the two
injunctions—(1) the injunction of having recourse to a duly qualified
teacher, and (2) the injunction of Vedic study.

‘Conception,’ is ‘ impregnation ’; that series of sacraments which
begins with this is called ‘*niṣēkādiḥ*,’ ‘*beyinning conception*.’ This
sacrament is laid down as to be performed after the marriage (of the
parents),—with the *mantra* ‘*viṣṇuryoniṅkalpayatu*,’ etc. (*Ṛgveda*,
10.18.1.1)—on the occasion of the first intercourse only, for some
people, while for others at each menstrual period, till conception takes
place.

That which has the ‘*crematorium*’ for its end is called ‘*ending with
the crematorium*.’ The word ‘crematorium’ stands for that place where
dead bodies are disposed of; and through association it indicates the
rites performed for the dead, called the ‘*Antyeṣṭi*’; as it is only
this performance that is done with *mantras*, and not the *place* (which
is what is directly denoted by the word ‘crematorium’).

The qualification mentioned in the text points to the Twice-born castes;
it is only these persons who have their sacraments done with *mantras*.
The author does not say simply ‘*dvijātīnām*,’ ‘for the twicc-born’ (and
he has taken to the round-about way of saying the same thing), because
Manu Svāyambhuva has a peculiar style of composing his verses.

The passage is not to be construed to mean that ‘the sacraments are laid
down *in mantras*’; because *mantras* do not contain the injunction of
any acts; they are not injunctive; they only serve as *reminders*,
during the performance of the act, of the details enjoined in other
texts. Hence the passage should be explained as meaning—‘those for whom
the sacraments are laid down as to be done with Mantras.’

‘*None other*,’—is purely explanatory; the rest of the sentence having
already served the purpose of restricting what is said to the twice-born
castes. Or, it may be taken as reiterated for the preventing of the idea
that some one might entertain the notion that ‘what is laid down here is
something that *must* be done by the twice-born castes, while for the
*Śūdra* it is neither prescribed nor interdicted.’—(16)


