+++
title = "018 तस्मिन् देशे"

+++
*Question*—“As regards the *usage* in the said country, what is the
condition of its reliability? Is it *learning* and *culture*? Or the
connection of the particular country is the only condition, and the
practices of the ignorant and the uncultured also arc authoritative? We
ask this because if ‘learning’ and ‘culture’ are not regarded as
necessary conditions, then the two qualifications mentioned in the sixth
verse—in the phrase ‘the Practice of good and learned men’—become
futile. And further, it is not possible for the ‘Practice of Bad men’ to
be a *source of Dharma*, for the simple reason that such persons can
have nothing to do with the Veda. If, on the other hand, *learning* and
*culture* do form the conditions of reliability, then no useful purpose
will have been served by the counection of the particular country herein
mentioned; because it cannot be said that practice of learned and
cultured men of other countries is not authoritative.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—The statement is based upon
probability; the chances are that in the country mentioned only learned
and cultured men are born. This is what is meant by the assertion that
‘*the Practice in that country is called the Practice of good*.’

Others have explained that the verse is intended to deny the authority
of a purely local ‘Practice’ (Usage), on the ground that in other
countries people marry the daughter of the maternal uncle.

This explanation is not right. Because it has been laid down as a
general principle that ‘from among the practices of the country, the
family and the caste, only that should be done what is not contrary to
law’; and the marrying of one’s maternal cousin is actually contrary to
the law, as found in the injunction that ‘one should marry beyond the
seventh grade of relationship on the father’s side and beyond the fifth
on the mother’s’ \[and the maternal cousin falls within these prohibited
degrees\] Further, as regards the said country of Brahmāvarta also there
are certain practices—such as eating in the same dish with boys who have
not undergone the Brahmanical Initiation—which are not regarded as
authoritative. In fact no practice can ever be authoritative which is
contrary to *Smṛti*; because it would be so much further removed from
the Veda (the source of all authority); as the Practice leads to the
inference of the *Smṛti*, and the *Smṛti* leads to the inference of the
Veda; while the *Smṛti* leads to the inference of its corroborative Veda
directly. There is another reason why Practices like the one mentioned
above can never be even suspected to be authoritative. Such Practices
are found to be clearly due to perceptible motives: *e.g*., some one
having fallen in love with a handsome maternal cousin married her,
through fear of the King, in order to escape from the penalty that would
be inflicted for violating the chastity of an unmarried girl; and others
who came after him being themselves illiterate and relying upon the
words ‘one should go on on the same path on which his father and
grand-father have gone’ (*Manu*, 4.178), taken in their literal sense,
came to regard the said marrying as ‘*Dharma*’ (something *that should
he done*). Then again, even though the text (4.172) prescribes an
expiatory rite in connection with the taking as wife of the three
classes of girls (the daughter of the Father’s sister, the daughter of
the Mother’s sister and the daughter of the Mother’s brother),—yet
people are liable to fall into the mistake that marriage with relatives
other than the three specified here is not interdicted. That such is not
the meaning of the verse (11.172) wo shall explain later on.

Now no *Smṛti* or *Practice*, that is prompted by a perceptible motive,
can ever be regarded as authoritative. Says the revered Bhatta
(Kumārila)—‘That *Smṛti*, which is contrary to the Veda, or deprecated,
and which serves a visible purpose, and is prompted by perceptible
motives, can never he based upon the Veda.’

From all this it follows that what is contained in this verse is only an
*arthavāda*, eulogising the particular country,—this eulogy being
supplementary to the Injunction coming later on that ‘the Twice-born
people should betake themselves to these countries’ (verse 21 below).

‘*Pāramparya*’ is the same as ‘*paramparā*,’ ‘Tradition’; which goes
from one to the other, from him again to a fourth person, and so on;
this succession is what is called ‘*Tradition*’; and ‘*Krama*,’
‘*line*,’ stands for ‘unbroken continuity;’—‘*come down*’ means
*learnt*.

‘*Sub-castes*’—are people of mixed birth;—the ‘castes’ along with these
are called *Sāntarālāḥ*.


