+++
title = "023 कृष्णसारस् तु"

+++
Where the deer known as ‘*Kṛṣṇasāra*’—that which is either black with
white spots, or black with yellow spots—‘*roams*,’—lives—*i.e*., is
found, born, —‘*by nature*,’—*i.e*., not that where it resides for a
time only, having been imported as a present of rare value, and so
forth;—‘*that country is to be known*’—regarded—‘as *yajñīya*’—‘*fit for
sacrificial acts*.’

‘*Beyond that*’—*i.e*., the region other than the one where the
*Kṛṣṇasāra* is indigenous—‘*is the land of the Mlecchas*.’ The
*Mlecchas* are the people who are known as lying beyond the pale of the
four castes,—not included even among the *Pratiloma* castes; such as the
*Medas*, the *Andhras*, the *Śabaras* and the *Pulindas*.

It is not meant that the sacrifices are to be performed on the very spot
where the deer roams,—in the way in which they are performed ‘on level
ground,’ according to the injunction that ‘one should perform sacrifices
on level ground’; as we h ave ‘rooms’ in the present tense, and
certainly one could not perform a sacrifice on the very spot, and at the
very time, at which the deer may have started to roam. Further, a
certain place is the ‘locus’ of the sacrifice only in the sense that it
holds a all those things that are operative towards its performance,
either as instruments or agents and the like, and certainly two material
substances (*i.e*., the Roaming Deer and the Sacrificial Accessories)
could never occupy the same spot. Nor can the condition mentioned (the
roaming of the deer) be taken as indirectly indicating some, other time
(than the one at which the *roaming* is being done); as no such indirect
indication is admissible in the case of Injunctions; as has been shown
under the *Adhikaraṇa* dealing with the ‘winnowing basket’
(*Mīmāmsā-Sūtra*, 1.2.26 *el. Seq*.), by Śabara (on 1.2.26), who
says—‘what is meant by *is done* is that *it is capable of being done*’
\[and the *present time* is not what is meant to be emphasised\].

“As a matter of fact, when one thing is spoken of as *located*
(contained) in another, it does not mean that it occupies the whole of
it; so that it is not necessary for the *Locus* to be occupied in its
entirety, as it is in the case of the oil contained in the
seasamum-seed. In fact, even when only a portion of one tiling is
occupied by another, the whole of the former becomes its *locus* or
*container; e.g*. when a man is spoken of as ‘sitting *in the house*,’
or ‘occupying the chariot.’ So that in the case in question what is
described here is the entire country, consisting of villages and towns,
and bounded by hills and rivers; and when the deer roams even in some
part of it, the whole country becomes its *locus*. Hence there is no
force in the argument that ‘two material substances cannot occupy the
same spot.’”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—In the present instance there is
no direct injunction, such as ‘one should perform sacrifices here (in
this country)’; as the injunctive affix is found added to the root ‘to
know’ (in the word ‘*jñeyaḥ*’), and not to the root ‘to sacrifice.’ All
that is meant is that the country spoken of is ‘fit for sacrifices’; the
meaning being that ‘this country is fit for sacrificial performances’;
and this ‘fitness for sacrifices’ is possible even without a direct
injunction (of the actual performance). The fact of the matter is that
it is only in the countries mentioned that the several sacrificial
accessories, in the shape of the *kuśa* -grass, the *Palāśa*, the
*Khadira* and other trees, are mostly found; and sacrificial performers
also, in the shape of persons belonging to the three higher castes and
learned in the three Vedas, are found only in these countries; and it is
on the basis of these facts that the countries have been described as
‘fit for sacrifices.’ The verb ‘*jñeyah*’ ending in the verbal affix
(‘*yat*’) also has the sense of the injunctive only imposed upon it, and
in reality it is only an *Arthavāda* resembling an injunction; just like
the passage ‘*jartilayavāgvā vā juhuyāt*,’ (‘one should offer either the
wild seasamum or the wild wheat’) \[which, even though cotaining the
injunctive word ‘*juhuyāt*,’ has been regarded as an *Arthavāda*
resembling an injunction\],

When again it is said that ‘*beyond this is the land the mlecchas*,’
this also is purely descriptive of the usual state of things; the sense
being that in these other lands it is mostly *mlecchas* that are born;
it does not mean that people inhabiting them are all (on that account)
‘*mlecchas*’; because what is a ‘*mleccha*’ is well known, just like the
‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ and other well known castes. In fact, the name
‘*mlecchadeśa*’ is to be taken literally, in the sense that it is ‘the
country of mlecchas’; so that if mlecchas happen to conquer a part of
Āryāvarta itself and take their habitation there, that also would become
‘*mlecchadeśa*.’ Similarly if a certain well-behaved king of the
Kṣatriya-caste should happen to defeat the *mlecchas* and make that land
inhabited by people of the four castes, relegating the indigenous,
*mlecchas* to the category of ‘*Chāṇḍāla*,’ as they are in *Āryāvarta*,
then that which was a ‘country of the mlecchas’ would become a ‘land fit
for sacrifices.’ And this for the simple reason that no laud is by
itself defective; it is only by association that it becomes defective,
just as it is when soiled by impure things. Hence, even apart from the
countries designated here as ‘fit for sacrifices,’ if, in a certain
place, all the necessary conditions are available, one should perform
his sacrifices, even though it be a place where the spotted deer does
not roam.

From all this it follows that the statement—‘*this should, be known as
the country fit for sacrifices, and beyond is the land of the mlecchas*’
is purely descriptive, being meant to be supplementary to the injunction
that follows in the next verse.—(23).


