+++
title = "024 एताण् द्विजातयो"

+++
The author now proceeds to state that injunction for the sake whereof
the names of several countries have been set forth.

‘*The twice-born people*.’ even though they be born in another country,
should ‘*resort these countries’ i.e*. to *Brahmāvarta*, etc. Abandoning
the country of their birth, they should make every effort to reside in
*Brahmāvarta* and the other countries just described.

In connection with this some people hold that the injunction of residing
in these countries is with a view to unseen (spiritual) results; the
sense being that even though certain results might accrue to one in
other countries also, yet people should reside in these countries; and
when we come to look for the reward of such residence,—we may conclude,
either (*a*) that the residence in the said countries is enjoined as
purificatory, just like bathing in the Gaṅgā and other sacred
places,—the idea being that just as the water of one place is more
sacred than that of another, so also it is only some regions that are
sacred, as has been described in the *Purāṇas*; or (*b*) that from the
mere residence itself the man goes to Heaven, this assumption being on
the analogy of the *Viśvajit* sacrifice.

Neither of these two views is admissible. If the present verse had laid
down such residence as would not be possible (without this injunction),
then there might be some justification for assuming a reward, and for
considering which of the two alternatives mentioned (in the previous
paragraph) is the more reasonable. As a matter of fact however, the
possibility of the residence in question is already secured by the fact
that it is only in the said countries that the performance of the
compulsory and optional rites is possible; in fact, apart from the said
countries, there is no possibility of the performance of *Dharma* in its
entirity. For instance, in the snowy regions of Kāśmīra and such places,
people suffer so much from cold that they are unable to attend to their
evening prayers outside their house; nor (for the same reason) is it
possible to read the Veda in the proper manner, going out either to the
east or to the north of the village; nor lastly, is it possible to bathe
in the river every day during the winter.

-----------------

The implication of the expression ‘*twice-born people*’ is that no
country can be ‘the land of mlecchas’ except when it is inhabited by
mlechhas. For otherwise any man entering that country would at once
become a ‘mleccha’; and as such how could he be a ‘twice born’ person?
It might be argued that—“by merely entering that country one does not
become a *mleccha*, he becomes so only by residing there, and it is this
residence that is prohibited here.”—But this can not bo accepted;
because what is mentioned here is ‘resorting,’ which connotes the idea
of the man being born in one country and then leaving it and going to
another country; and there can be no ‘resorting’ to a place which is
already inhabited. If this were not meant, then the Author would have
simply said that ‘one should never reside in any other country after
renouncing these.’ It might be argued that “the ‘resorting’ being
already accomplished, the re-iteration of it serves the purpose of
precluding others.”—But in that case this would become a ‘*Parisankhyā*’
a ‘Preclusive Injunction and such injunctions are beset with three
defects.

It might be argued that “it is the *abandoning* (of the countries) that
is indirectly indicated, the sense being that one should never abandon
these countries.”

But so long as the direct meaning of a text is admissible, there can bo
no justification for admitting an indirect indication. For this reason
what has been said above cannot be accepted. From all this it follows
that what the words imply is that men do not become ‘*mlecchas*’ by
merely coming into contact with a certain country, it is the country
that becomes ‘the land of *mlecchas*’ through the contact of men
(*mlecchas*).

In as much as service of the twice-born people constitutes the
prescribed duty of the *śūdra*, it follows as a matter of course that
the latter should reside where the former reside; but if he fails to
obtain a living in that country, then he may go. and live in another
country; this is what is permitted (in the latter part of the verse).
When the man comes to have a large family, or becomes unfit for
service,—even though the twice-born person on whom he is dependent may
be prepared to support him,—the *śūdra* may go and live in another
country, where there may be a chance for him to acquire wealth. But even
so he should never live in a country where *mlecchas* form the majority
of inhabitants; he should betake himself to a land fit for sacrifices;
because if he lived in a country abounding in *mlecchas* it would be
impossible for him to avoid their contact, in the course of moving,
sitting, eating and so fourth; so that there would be the fear of his
becoming a *mleccha*.

‘*Distressed for a living*,’—*i.e*., suffering from want of a living.
‘*Living*’ means wealth sníficient for the maintaining of one’s family.
In the absence of such ‘living,’ there is a curtain amount of
‘distress;’ and this distress which is caused by the want of living is
spoken of as caused by the ‘living’ itself; just as good harvest being
the effect of rain, famine is caused by *want of rain*, but is spoken of
as ‘caused *by rain*.’

‘*In any country*’ implies want of restriction.


