+++
title = "025 एषा धर्मस्य"

+++
Here we have the recapitulation of all that has gone before,—and this
for the purpose of refreshing the memory.

‘*Yoniḥ*’—‘*source*,’ *cause*.

‘*Samāśena*’—‘*briefly*,’ *in brief*.

‘*Sambhavaśca*’—‘*also the origin*’—this refers to what has gone in
Discourse I.

‘*Of all this*’—this refers to the ‘creation of the world,’ which is
recalled in the form of a mental picture, and thus brought before the
eye (which makes it capable of being referred to by the pronoun ‘this’).

‘*The duties of the several castes*’—The duties that should he performed
by the various castes.

‘*Learn*’—*i.e*. in detail.

In this connection, the author of the *Smṛtivivaraṇa* describes five
kinds of *Dharma* or Duty:—

1.  ‘*Varṇa-dharma*,’ ‘duties pertaining to caste;’
2.  ‘*Āśrama-dharma*,’ ‘Duties pertaining to Life-stages,’
3.  ‘*Varṇāśrama-dharma*,’ ‘duties pertaining to caste and life-stage’;
4.  ‘*Naimittika-Dharma*,’ ‘Occasional Duties,’
5.  and ‘*Guṇa-Dharma*’ ‘Duties pertaining to qualification.’—

\(1\) Of these, that which proceeds entirely on the basis of caste, and
takes no account of age, life-stage or any such circumstances, is called
‘duty pertaining to castes;’ *e.g*., what is laid down in such rules
as—‘the *Brāhmaṇa* should not be killed,’ ‘wine shall not be drank by
the *Brāhmaṇa*’—refers to a particular caste only, and is meant to apply
to every person of that caste till his very last breath.

\(2\) ‘Duty pertaining to life-stage’ is that which does not depend upon
caste only, but takes account of a particular life-stage also; *e.g*.,
‘Fire-kindling and alms-begging are the duties of the Vedic student’
(*Gautama* 2.8).

\(3\) ‘Duty pertaining to caste and life-stage’ is that which is related
to both; *e g*., when it is prescribed that ‘the bow-string made of
grass is the girdle for the Kṣatriya student,’ it means that what is
mentioned does not apply to any other life-stage (than that of the
student), nor to any other caste (except the Kṣatriya);—what is meant to
he the example here is the *wearing* of the girdle during student-life,
not the *first* taking of it, which forms part of the *Upanayana-rites*,
and does not pertaiṇ to the particular life-stage; and the *Upanayana*
itself is what ushers in a particular life-stage, and it is not a ‘duty
pertaining to the life-stage.’

\(4\) The ‘Occasional Duty’ consists of such acts as the *purifying of
things* and so forth.

\(5\) ‘Duty pertaining to qualifications’ is that which is presented in
connection with special qualifications; *e.g*., what is laid down in
such rules as ‘he should be absolved from six’ is with reference to the
qualification of ‘vast learning;’ to this same category belong also all
those duties that are laid down for the ‘annointed’ Kṣatriya.

All these are meant to be included under the ‘*of the castes*’
(mentioned in the text); and hence the text mentions those only; and it
does not make mention of the sub-divisions, because in the first place
there are endless subdivisions, and secondly, (if the text went about
mentioning all possible kinds of duties) it would have to mention those
many duties also which are laid down for men in general, without
reference to any particular caste. Similarly with other varieties of
‘Duty.’ In fact the ‘Duties pertaining to castes’ have been mentioned
only as an indication; it does not mean that the duties of the mixed
castes are excluded from consideration; because this latter has also
been promised (in 1.2) as the subject to lie expounded; and the present
statement is only meant to be the reiteration of that promise.—(25)


