+++
title = "026 वैदिकैः कर्मभिः"

+++
The ‘*Vedic rites*’ spoken of here are *mantra-recitations*. ‘*Veda*’
here stands for *mantras*; and what ‘arises out of them’ (which is what
is expressed by the affix in ‘*Vaidikaiḥ*’) is the ‘reciting’; hence the
nominal affix ‘*ṭhañ*’ comes under the provisions of the Vārtika on
Pāṇini, 4. 3. 60.

Or, the word ‘*vaidika*’ (Vedic) may he taken as figuratively applied to
the *rites*, on the ground of their source lying in the Veda. ‘*Karma*,’
‘Rites,’ would, in this case, stand for the *act* constituting the
procedure; and hence becomes possible the differentiation and the
relation of cause and effect (between the *Karma* and the *Saṁskāra*
which is expressed in the assertion—‘the consecration, *saṁskāra*,
should he performed *by means of* the Rites?

‘*Conception*’—is the depositing of the semen in the womb, and
‘*niṣekādiḥ*’ stands for that body of sacraments to he described below,
which liegins with the said ‘Conception’ and ends with ‘Initiation’ (
*Upanayana*). The singular number in ‘*Śarīrasaṁskāraḥ*,’ ‘corporeal
consecration,’ is due to the whole body of sacraments being taken
collectively. ‘*Consecration*’ means the preparation of a qualified
body; and the Eeveral sacraments serve to produce in the body special
qualifications.

This is what is meant by the term ‘*pāvanaḥ*,’ ‘*it nurifies*,’ removes
impurities.

‘*In* *this world* *and also after death*’.—This means that the person
duly consecrated becomes entitled to the performance of all those acts
that, like the *Kārīri* and other sacrifices, lead to material results,
-as also those that, like the Jyotiṣṭoma etc., bring spiritual rewards;
and hence the consecrations are of use in both worlds.

‘*Puṇyaiḥ*’—‘*auspicious*,’ *ie*., propitious; *i.e*., they bring good
luck and remove bad luck. Thus there is a clear difference between the
word ‘*puṇy* *a*’ and ‘*pāvana*’ here.

‘*For the twice-born persons*,’—this serves to exclude the *Śūdras*.
This word serves to point out who are the persons to be consecrated; and
it is only by indirect indication that the three higher castes arc
understood to be meant; for before consecration, they are not yet
‘twice-born’ (the ‘second birth’ consisting of the consecration).—(26)


