+++
title = "029 प्राङ् नाभिवर्धनात्"

+++
‘*Vardhana*’ is *cutting*.

‘*Jātakarma*’ is the name of the particular rite. The exact form of this
rite is to be learnt from the *Gṛhya-sūtras*, In answer to the question
as to which is the act to which the name ‘Jāta-karma’ is applied, the
author adds—‘the *feeding with gold, honey and butter?*.’ ‘*Of him*’
refers to the child; or, it may refer to the rite; the sense being that
‘*of* *rite*’ of Jāta-karma, the principal part consists in the feeding
of the child *to the accompaniment of mantras*.

‘*To the accompaniment of mantras’,—i.e*., the act should be done along
with the reciting of mantras. Though the present text does not specify
the mantras, yet, since all *Smṛtis* have the same end in view, we must
accept those same mantras that are prescribed in other *Smṛtis*. Hence
it follows that the mantras that should be recited are those that have
been mentioned in the *Gṛhya-sūtras*.

“If it is necessary to call in the aid of the *Gṛhya-sūtras*, the
substances (Gold, Honey and Butter) also need not have been mentioned
here; as in the *Gṛhya-sūtra* we find the following words (in
Apastamba’s *Gṛhya-sūtra*, 1.15.1).—‘The child should be made to eat
butter, honey and the essence of gold with a golden ladle, with the
mantra, *Prati dadāmi madhuno ghṛtaṣya* etc.’ Further, there are many
*Gṛhya-sūtras*; the mantras also that are prescribed in the various
*Gṛhyaṣūtras* are different; the very procedure of the rite is variously
prescribed; so that (if we were to seek for information from the
*Gṛhyas*) we would fail to know which one of these we should adopt. It
might he argued that the name of the particular Vedic Rescension (which
the performer has studied and with which a particular *Gṛhyasūtra* is
connected) would help to determine the exact procedure to be adopted.
But in that case, there can be no use in Manu laying down the
‘Birth-rite’ and the other sacraments; as these also could be learnt
from the *Gṛhyasūtras* themselves. Every *sūtra* is named after a
particular Vedic Rescension,—*e.g*., ‘*Gṛhya* of the *Kaṭhas*,’ ‘*Gṛyya*
of the *Āśvalāyanas*’ and so forth; so that a man would naturally adopt
that procedure which is laid down in the *Gṛhya* that is named after the
Rescension to which he belongs.”

To the above our answer is as follows:—The fact that the substances
(Honey, etc.) mentioned in the text are just those prescribed in the
Gṛhyas in connection with the ‘*Jātakarma*,’ shows that the rites
mentioned (here and in the *Gṛhya*) are the same. This is what leads us
to the recognition that—‘the rite ordained here having the same name and
the same substances as those found in the *Gṛhyas*, this must be the
same as that.’ In several cases we recognise a thing through its
qualities. And when the rites are one and the same, if a certain detail
is not mentioned in one text, it has to be brought in from the other
text, specially when there is no inconsistency between the two. It has
been decided that th e act (of *Agnihotra*) prescribed in the several
rescensional Vedic texts is one and the same; and the analogy of this
leads us to conclude that the act (of the sacrament) as prescribed in
the several *Smṛtis* (of Manu and of the *Gṛhya-sūtras*) must be one and
the same. As regards the uncertainty that has been urged by the objector
as to the exact procedure to be adopted, in face of there being many,
*Gṛhyas* laying down diverse procedures,—our answer to that is that all
the *Gṛhyas* being equally authoritative, what one has got to do is that
when the details varying in them are those relating to the end, he may
adopt any one of them optionally, while if the details varying relate to
different purposes, he should employ them all. The name of the Vedic
Rescension can never form the determining factor. Because the name of
the Vedic text in relation to a particular individual is not such an
invariable factor as his ‘*yotra* and *pravara*’ are; for a man is
called after that Vedic Rescension which he happens to study: if he has
studied the ‘*Kāthaka*’ rescension he is called ‘*Kāṭhaka*,’ and if he
has studied the Ṛgveda, he is called ‘*Bahvṛca*’; and in regard to
studying there is no such hard and fast rule as that ‘such and such a
man should study only such and such a rescensional text.’ Then again, a
man very often studies several Vedic texts, as is ordained (by Manu, in
3.2)—‘Having studied the *Vedas* &c. &c. and one has studied all the
three Vedas comes to be known by all such names—as ‘*Ka?thuma*’
(Sāmavedin) ‘*Kāṭhāka*’ (Yajurvedin) and *Bahvṛca*’ (Ṛgvedin); and in
this case one must have recourse to option. For the man however who
studies a single Vedic text, it is only right that he should adopt the
procedure prescribed in the *Gṛhya* that is named after that Vedic text;
in fact, he *can* follow only that procedure; as he has studied only the
mantras occurring in that particular text; and these alone he can recite
(properly). In fact the only knowledge that he possesses of the Rite is
what is derived from that particular text.

“As for the man’s knowing the *mantras*, since the Veda is studied only
for the performance of the rites, the man would read up just those
mantras (also of the other texts) that might be used in a certain
performance.”

Our answer to this is that the study of the Veda is undertaken in virtue
of the Injunction of ‘Vedic study;’ and until one has studied the Veda,
he is not entitled to perform any religious act; it is not (as the
objector thinks) that the Veda is studied only for the performing of the
acts. In fact, the name that has been applied to the various *Gṛhyas*—as
‘this is the Gṛhya of the Kaṭhas,’ ‘this is the *Gṛhya* of the
*Vājasaneyins*’ and so forth—is simply for the purpose of indicating
what particular mantras have to be employed by certain persons; and when
the majority of mantras prescribed in a certain *Gṛhya* happen to be
those that have been read in a particular Vedic text, that *Gṛhya* comes
to be named after that text. Further, when *Gṛhya Smṛti* is a
trustworthy source of knowledge, even though it may be named after the
‘*Kaṭhas*,’ it cannot fail to make its purport known to the Ṛgvedins
also; and what forms the purport of the Vedas and the *Smṛtis* is that
‘such and such an act should be done.’ So that when one has come to know
that ‘this should be done,’ there can be nothing to limit the
performance of that act to any particular class of persons, unless there
is a Vedic text specifying any particular performer;—as for instance,
when the performance of the *Tanūnapāt Prayāja* is restricted to the
‘Vaśiṣṭha’ clan,—or a distinct prohibition sets aside the said
‘performability.’ Neither of these two circumstances is present in the
case in question. Nor can it presumed that the *Ṛgveda* is not an
authority for the *Kaṭhas*, *or vice versa*. Because until a particular
Vedic text has been actually studied, there is no difference between the
‘*Kaṭha*’ and the ‘*Non-Kaṭha*.’ As regards the ‘*Gotra*’ (the
Clan-name), this is fixed for each man (being determined by his birth).
So that the ‘*Gṛhya*’ of a man does not stand on the same footing as his
‘*Gotra*.’

This \[that the *Gṛhya* of the man is that connected with the Vedic text
that he has studied\] is what is meant by the assertion—‘He who
renounces his *won Gṛhyaṣūtra* and acts according to another
*Gṛhyasūtra* &c.’ In fact the man can carry into practice the precepts
of that text only which he h as studied. Consequently if one were to
give up the rules of his own Vedic text to perform a rite in accordance
with the Vedic text studied by his forefathers, and adopt the procedure
laid down in the *Gṛhyas* belonging to this latter, he would incur the
sin of ‘renouncing his own Vedic text’; or in this case the sin of
‘renouncing the text’ will have been committed by the father who did not
teach the boy that particular text which had been continually studied in
his family; and no blame attaches, in this, to the boy himself. In a
case where the boy has lost his father and betakes himself to the
teacher, as Jābāla is described as having done, it would be right for
the Teacher to teach him that Text which had been studied in the boy’s
family,—in accordance with the law ‘one should proceed by the path by
which his father and grandfather have proceeded’ (*Manu*, 4.178); ‘and
the renouncing of the hereditary Vedic text’ would be justifiable only
in the event of its study being absolutely impossible.

From all this we deduce the following conclusion:—All the
sacraments—‘*Jātakarma*’ and the rest—have been prescribed in all the
Smṛtis; and where they lay down different details pertaining to diverse
purposes, they should all be employed; but when any such details pertain
to the same end and are mutually inconsistent, then there should be an
option as to the particular detail to be employed.

‘*Of the male child*’—is added with a view to exclude the female and the
sexless child.

Others however have held that there is no special significance attaching
to the masculine gender of the word; because the context refers to all
‘twice-born’ persons in general as to undergo the sacramental rites.
That which is meant to be ‘consecrated’ forms the principal factor; and
it has been decided that no significance attaches to any such
qualifications gender, number and the like, when applied to the
principal factor; *e.g*., even though the washing of the cups is laid
down in the words—‘one should wash the *cup*’ (in the singular),—yet
*all* the cups are washed. Similarly when it is laid down, that ‘the
*man* who is feverish, or just free from fever, should be fed at the
close of the day,’—the feverish *woman* also is fed at that same time;
and it is because the present verse affords the idea of the sacrament
being performed for females also that the Author has added the interdict
(in 2.66) that ‘the whole of this is to be done for women without
Mantras’ \[otherwise, if the present verse itself had excluded the
women, there would be no point in this further interdict\]. Then again,
marriage (which is also a sacrament) is actually spoken of (in 9. 203)
in connection with Eunuchs.

Our answer to the above is as follows:—The word ‘male’ does not denote
the ‘human’ genus in general, in the way that the word ‘man’ does; and
it is only if it did have that denotation that there might he some
ground for not attaching any significance to the gender expressed by the
particular case-ending. What the word ‘male’ denotes in all cases is a
particular gender in the form of *masculinity*, as pertaining to all
things, moving and unmoving, corporeal and incorporeal. In the present
case the gender is denoted by the basic noun (‘*pumān*’ in ‘*puruṣaḥ*’)
itself; and it is only in connection with what is denoted by the
case-ending, that the question of significance or non-significance can
arise; and the reason for this lies in the fact that the denotation of
*number* (or gender) is not the only function of the case-ending,—it may
have its use simply in the denoting of any one of several such factors
as the ‘accusative character’ and so forth \[so that if no significance
is attached to any one of these several factors, it does not matter\].
In the present case however (where the gender is denoted by the basic
noun itself), if no significance were attached to the gender, then the
word ‘*pumān*’ would become absolutely meaningless. As in the very
instance cited above, full significance is actually attached to the
denotation of the basic noun ‘*Cup*’; and this is done simply because
the sentence would, otherwise, become absolutely meaningless.

The following argument might be urged—“It is not only what is signified
by the case-ending that may be non-significant; as a matter of fact, the
denotation of the entire word, if it qualifies the subject, is regarded
as non-significant. For instance, in the case of the text which lays
down an expiatory rite in the case of one for whom ‘*both offering
materials* have been spoilt.’—though we have the word ‘both,’ yet the
expiatory rite is performed even on the spoiling of even one of the two
materials, milk and curd; and no significance is attached to the
denotation of the entire word ‘*both*’ (which qualifies the subject.)”

To this objection some people offer the following answer:—The present
case is not analogous to the case just cited. In the latter, the
‘*Pañcaśarāva* rite’ (which is the expiatory rite referred to) is not
done for the sake of the offering-material; all that is meant is that
the spoiling of the materials provides the occasion for the performance
of the rite;—while in the case in question, the sacraments are done for
the sake of the Boy.

This difference (between the two cases) however is of no consequence at
all. Because as a matter of fact, it is only with a view to avoid a
syntactical split that significance is not attached to qualifications;
and even though the Rite were for the sake of the material, that would
not prevent the said syntactical split.

Hence the real answer to the objection is as follows:—The passage
beginning with ‘*vaidikaiḥ karmabhiḥ*, etc.,’ (Verse 26) is what
constitutes the original injunction of the ‘*Jātakarma*’ sacrament; and
throughout this passage it is the *male* that is indicated as the person
to be ‘consecrated.’ So that if no significance were attached to this
*male-character*, the whole passage would become meaningless. It is this
same consideration which leads us (in the case of the passage cited by
the objection) to attach due significance to the denotation of the word
‘offering-material’ (even though none is attached to its qualification
‘both’).

“Well, then the sacraments would be performed for the *Śūdra* also; as
the passage does not specify any particular caste.”

Certainly there is no possibility of the sacraments for *Śūdras*,
because sacraments are performed to the accompaniment of *Mantras*. Or,
we may take the term ‘of the twice-born persons,’ occurring in a
supplementary passage, as providing the necessary restriction. Nor does
the term ‘of the twice-born persons’ in the said passage pertain (as a
qualification) only to what is therein enjoined; so that it cannot be
urged that, “in as much as the necessity of their consecration has been
mentioned in that passage, no significance can attach to the term ‘male’
in the present passage; just as none is attached to the term ‘both’ in
the passage referred to above.”

As for the fact of a later text (Verse 66) speaking of the Rites for
females being ‘without mantras,’ this could be taken as an independent
injunction; without necessarily depending upon the fact of the
‘sacrament *with mantras*’ being possible for women also (under the
present verse; of which the later verse has been regarded as an
exception, by the objector above).

As for the ‘marriage of sexless persons’;—‘sexless’ persons are of
various kinds—*e.g*., (*a*) those whose semen is ‘airy,’ (Impotent),
(*b*) those who have the signs of both sexes (Hermaphrodite), and (*c*)
those whose organs are inactive. All these people cannot be excluded
from all the ‘sacraments’; because, in the first place their
*impotence*, etc., cannot be detected at the time (during infancy) when
the ‘*Jātakarma*’ and the other (earlier) sacraments are performed; and
secondly (even when detected) the said impotence, etc., may be such as
might be cured, and certainly a characteristic that is not of a
permanent character can never serve as a disqualification. For instance,
*absence of wealth*; this is not a permanent characteristic, like the
*caste* of a person; for the man who has no wealth comes to acquire
wealth; having remained poor for a long time, a man becomes very rich in
a single day. It is on the killing of such a (confirmed and permanent)
eunuch that one becomes purified (of the sin) by the giving of a load of
dry grass; and the reason for this lies in the fact that he has had no
‘sacraments,’ he has not been ‘initiated,’ and his life is of no use to
any person.

From all this it follows that the present text prescribes the sacraments
for *males* only,—the later Verse (66) prescribes them for *females* as
to be done ‘without mantras,’—and for *eunuchs* there are no sacraments
at all.—(29)


