+++
title = "030 नामधेयन् दशम्याम्"

+++
One should perform the ‘naming,’ ‘*Nāmadheya*,’ of the child on the
tenth or the twelfth day.

No significance is meant to be attached to the sense of the causative
affix in ‘*Kārayet*,’ should *have* *it done*.’ For the *Gṛhyasūtra*
simply says—‘On the tenth day the father should take up the child and
*perform* his naming’ (without the causal form).

The term ‘*Nāmadheya*’ means simply ‘*nāma*,’ ‘name’; and it is that
word by which a person is called during life.

In as much as the section has started with the mentiou of the
‘*Jātakarma*,’ as to be done ‘before the cutting of the umbilical cord,’
it follows that the ‘*tenth*’ and ‘*twelfth*’ (of the Text) refer to the
day as counted from the day of birth; and they do not refer to the
*lunar dates*.

On this point some people have held that the mention of the ‘tenth day’
is only meant to indicate the ‘passing of the days of impurity’; the
past-participle epithet ‘*atītāyām*,’ ‘having passed,’ being understood.
So that the meaning is that, ‘for the *Brāhmaṇa* the Naming should be
done after the lapse of the tenth day, for the *Kṣatriya* after the
lapse of the twelfth day, and for the *Vaiśya* after the lapse of the
fifteenth day.’

This explanation, however, is not right. For there being no ground for
taking the words in the indirect figurative sense suggested, the
ceremony could very well be performed during the period of impurity,
just like the ‘Birth-rite.’ If the feeding of the Brāhmaṇas were
enjoined (as a necessary accompaniment of the Ṛte), then there might be
some justification for the suggested figurative interpretation.

If the ‘tenth’ or the ‘twelfth’ day happen to fulfil the conditions
mentioned in the second line of the verse, then the ceremony should be
done on those days. Otherwise it should be performed on some other
*auspicious lunar date*.

The ‘auspicious lunar dates’ are the, the *fifth* (day of the lunar
month), and so forth.

‘*Puṇya*,’ ‘*auspicious*,’ means *commended*. The *ninth, fourteenth*
and such other days (of the lunar month),—which are commonly called
‘*Riktā*,’—are ‘not commended,’ ‘inauspicious.’

‘*Muhūrta*,’ ‘*moment*,’ stands for what is called ‘*lagna*’ (the point
of time indicated by the ‘contact with the Horizon,’ *i.e*., the
‘rising,’ of a particular Zodiacal Sign), Aquarius, and the rest. ‘At a
moment that is *auspicious*,’—*i.e*., which is not possessed by any evil
planet, which is looked upon by Jupiter and Venus. Such ‘auspiciousness’
of the moment can be ascertained with the help of the science of
Astrology.

‘*Under a propitious lunar asterism*,’—the ‘are those beginning with
*Śraviṣṭhā*; and that day on which these happen to be ‘propitious.’ The
‘propitiousness’ of the Lunar Asterism consists in its being free from
the contact of ‘malignant’ and ‘evil’ planets, as also from the
condition of ‘*Vyatīpāta*’ (a malignant aspect of the Sun and the Moon).

The particle ‘*Vā*’ in the Text has a collective sense (meaning ‘and’);
hence the meaning is that ‘the ceremony should he performed on an
auspicious day, *and* at an auspicious moment, *and* under a faultless
lunar asterism.’ The due combination of all these conditions can be
ascertained with the help of the Science of Astrology.

The final upshot of the whole comes to this:—The ceremony should never
be performed before the tenth or twelfth day,—and after these days it
may be performed only at the auspicious moment on that day which is
found to be under a propitious lunar asterism.’—(30)


