+++
title = "031 मङ्गल्यम् ब्राह्मणस्य"

+++
The Author now proceeds to determine the form of the name to be given to
the child.

‘*Maṅgalyam*,’ ‘*auspicious*,’ means ‘*maṅgalāya hitam*,’ or ‘*maṅgalāya
sādhu*,’ ‘conducive to welfare.’ The ‘welfare’ meant here is that which
consists in the fulfilment of something desirable, in the shape of
longevity, wealth and such other things as lead to physical and mental
pleasure. And a term can be said to be ‘conducive,’—‘*hita*’ or
‘*sādhu*,’—to this welfare, only when it connotes it; and it is in this
sense that we have the Nominal Affix (‘*yat*,’ in ‘*maṅgalyam*’).
Further, by being ‘conducive’ it is not meant that it should always
express the actual fulfilment of a desirable thing; but that it may also
express the desirable thing itself.

This connotation of the desirable thing may be either (a) by means of
compounds, such as ‘*āyuḥsiddhi*’ (accomplishment, of longevity),
‘*dhanasiddhi*’ (acquisition of wealth), ‘*putralāhha*’ (obtaining of a
son), and so forth,—or (*b*) by a nominal affix connoting
‘conduciveness’ ‘effectiveness,’ or ‘purpose.’ But the *Gṛhyasūtra* has
prohibited the use of a name ending in a Nominal affix—‘One should fix a
name ending with a Verbal, not one with a nominal affix’—says Pāraskara.
And as for compounds also, there is a combination of the denotations of
two words; so that there is a chance of the name consisting of many
letters; the lext is going to lay down certain appendages to the actual
names, such as ‘the name of Brāhmaṇa should end in *Śarman*, and so
forth’ (Manu, 2.32); so that if the name consists of three or four
letters, along with the appendage ‘*śarman*,’ it would oome to consist
of five or six letters; and this would go against the rule that ‘the
name should consist of two or four letters.’ (Baudhāyana and Āpastamba).
From all this it follows that such words should he employed as names as
are connotative of things that are desired by most people,—*e.g*., son,
cattle, landed property, daughter, wealth and so forth; and these should
end with the term ‘**śarm*an*.’ Thus it is that such names become
possible as ‘*Go-**śarm**an*.’ ‘*Dhana-**śarm**an*,’
‘*Hiraṇya-**śarm**an*,’ ‘*Kalyāṇa-**śarm**an*,’ ‘*Maṅgala-**śarm**an*,’
and so on.

Or, the term ‘*maṅgala*’ may be taken as standing for ‘*Dharma*,’
‘*Merit*’; and ‘*maṅgalya*’ in that case would mean *that which is
conducive to merit* (meritorious).

“What is it that is *conducive to merit?*”

All those words that constitute the names of Deities; *e.g., ‘Indra*,’
‘*Agni*,’ ‘*Vāyū*’; also the names of sages—*e.g*., ‘*Vasiṣṭha*,’
‘*Viśvāmiṭra*,’ ‘*Medhātithi*’; these latter also are ‘conducive to
merit’; as is clearly indicated by such directions as—(a) ‘one should
make offerings to the sages,’ (*b*) ‘one should meditate upon the men of
pious deeds,’ ‘one who desires prosperity should, on rising in the
morning, repeat the names of Deities, sages and of the Brāhmaṇas of
pious deeds.’

The epithet ‘*mangalya*,’ ‘*auspicious*’ (meritorious) serves to
preclude all ‘inauspicious’ names, such as ‘*Yama*,’ ‘*Mṛtyu*’ and the
like; and also those that are meaningless—such, as ‘*Ḍittha*’ and the
like.

‘*That of the Kṣatriya connected with power*,’—*i.e., expressive of
power*. The ‘*anvaya*’ (expressed by ‘*anvita*’ in the compound
‘*balānvita*’ means *connection*; and the only connection that a word
can have with a thing is the relation, of being connotative of
it.—‘*Power*’ is *strength*; and the word, that connotes this should be
used as the name for the *Kṣatriya,e.g*., ‘*Śatruntapa*,’
‘*Duryodhana*,’ ‘*Prajāpāla*.’ The several kinds of names have been
mentioned (in the text), as indicative of the several castes.

Similarly, ‘*that of the Vaiśya Associated with wealth*.’ It is not
meant that only synonyms of ‘*dhana*’ should be used,—such as ‘*Dhana*’
‘*Vitta*,’ ‘*Svāpateya*,’—but that any word that may be in any way
connotative of wealth should be used. Or, what is meant is that either
such words as ‘*dhana*’ (‘wealth’) and the like should be used, or such
as signify connection with wealth; such as ‘*Dhanakarman*,’
‘*Mahādhana*,’ ‘*Goman*,’ ‘*Dhānyag?aha*.’

Throughout this verse, such is the meaning—of the term ‘connected with
power’ and ‘associated with wealth.’ If this were not what is meant, the
text would have said simply ‘the *names of power* should be used.’ And
in that case, since the words actually denotative of *power* would be
very few in number, while the number of individuals to be named would be
endless,—all usage (based oh names) would come to an end.

‘*That of the Śūdra contemptible*,’—such as ‘*Kṛpaṇaka*,’ ‘*Dīna*,’
‘*Śavaraka*,’ and so forth.—(31)


