+++
title = "032 शर्मवद् ब्राह्मणस्य"

+++
\[What appears to be the meaning is that\] the actual term (‘*śarman*,’
etc.) should form part of the name,—and that the two terms (mentioned in
the preceding and the present verse) should appear in the order stated,
the ‘auspicious’ term coming at the beginning and the term ‘*śarman*’ at
the end (of the name),—as illustrated above (‘*Go-śarman*,’
‘*Dhana-śarman*’ and so forth).

But this would not be possible in regard to the names of the *Kṣatriya*
and the rest; because the term ‘*rakṣā*.’ (‘security,’ which is
mentioned in connection with the *Kṣatriya*) is of the feminine gender,
and as such could not be co-ordinated with the names of males. Hence in
view of conformity, and in view also of actual practice, and also in
view of the two verses being syntactically distinct, we should take them
as complementary to each other; the sense being that the ‘auspicious
name’ (mentioned in the preceding verse) should he ‘expressive of
*śarman*, Peace’—this term standing for *refuge, shelter, happiness*. It
is only if we take the term ‘*śarman*’ of the text as standing for what
is developed by it, that we have the possibility of names ending in
‘*svāmū*,’ ‘*datta*,’ ‘*bhūti*,’ and the rest; the name ‘*Indrasvāmī*’
meaning ‘he who has Indra for his shelter’; ‘*Indra-datta*’ also
signifies the fact of Indra being the *shelter*.

Similarly with all the rest (the names of the *Kṣatriya*, etc.)

“What does this argument mean—that, in view of the two verses being
syntactically distinct, we should take them as complementary to each
other? Por the same reason, why are not the two sentences ‘one should
sacrifice with *Vrīhi*’ and ‘one should sacrifice with *Yava*’ taken as
complementary (and not as optional alternatives, as they have been
taken)?”

What we have said is only what is indicated (by the words of the Text).
The Text being the work of a human writer, if he had intended the
statements to be optional alternatives, he should, for the sake of
brevity, have said ‘the name should be *either auspicious or expressive
of peace*’; when we have two distinct syntactical constructions, there
are two verbs, and this becomes too prolix (and the prolixity cannot be
justified except by taking the two as complementary). \[All this reason
ng, based upon *intention* and *propriety of speech*, cannot apply to
the case of Vedic sentences, where there is no author.\]

‘*Rakṣā*,’ is ‘protection,’ ‘preservation.’

‘*Puṣṭi*’ is ‘prosperity’ as well as ‘security.’ Such names as
‘*Govṛddha*’ ‘*Dhanagupta*.’

‘*Preṣya*’ is ‘submissive’; such names as ‘*Brāhmaṇa-dāsa*,’ and
‘*Devadāsa*,’ which means (respectively) ‘submissive to, dependent upon,
the Brāhmaṇa’ and ‘submissive to and dependent upon a deity.’—(32)


