+++
title = "033 स्त्रीणां सुखोद्यम्"

+++
Inasmuch as significance has been attached to the mention of the ‘male’
child (in verse 29), what has been said in the preceding verses is not
applicable to women; and the present verse is going to lay down rules
regarding the names of women.

‘*Easily pronouncible*’;—that which can be easily pronounced; the name
of women should be such as can be uttered, with ease, even by women and
children. It is mostly women and children that have got to deal with
women; and the woman’s organ of speech being not very efficient, she
cannot pronounce each and every Sanskrit word; hence the Text lays
stress upon this pronouncibility in the case of feminine names. This
however docs not mean that the masculine names may be unpronouncible. As
examples of ‘pronouncible’ names wo have, ‘*Maṅgala-devī*,’
‘*Chārudati*,’ ‘*Suvadanā*,’ etc., and as counter-examples (*i.e*., of
*unpronouncible* names), ‘*Śarmiṣṭhā*,’ ‘*Suśliṣṭāṅgī*,’ and the like.

‘*Not harsh*,’—*i.e*., not denoting any thing harsh; names denoting
harsh things are such as ‘*Ḍākinī*’ (Sorceress), ‘*Paruṣā*’ (Rough) and
so forth.

‘*Of plain meaning*,’—whose moaning does not need to be explained before
it is comprehended; which, as soon as it is heard, couveys its meaning
to the learned and the unlearned alike. As examples of names with
meanings not plain, we have, (*a*) ‘*Kāmaniḍhā*’ and (*b*)
‘*Kāriṣagandhī*’; the meaning of these terms is not comprehended until
the following explanations have been provided:—(*a*) ‘who is, as if it
were, the *very* receptacle of love, she in whom all love is contained,’
and (*b*) ‘*Kārīṣagandhī*’ is the ‘daughter of Kariṣagandhi.’

‘*Heart-captivating*,’—that which pleases the mind; *e.g*., ‘*Śreyasī*’;
while of the contrary kind we have the name ‘*Kālākṣī*.’

‘*Auspicious*,’—such as ‘*Śarmavatī*’; of the contrary kind is the name
‘*Abhāgā*,’ ‘M *andabhāgā*.’ ‘*Ending in a long vowel*,’—that which has
a long vowel at the end. Contrary to this is the name ‘*Śarat*.’

‘*Āśīrvāda*’ is *that which denotes benediction*; ‘*abhidhāna*’ is
*term*; and when the two are compounded in tho *dhāraya* form, we get
the meaning ‘*benedictory term*’; and the name that contains such a term
is called ‘*āśīrvādābhidhānavat*,’ ‘*containing a benedictory term*.’
Examples of such names—‘*Saputrā*,’ ‘*Bahuputrā*,’ ‘*Kulavāhikā*’; these
are benedictory names; of the contrary kind are such names as,
‘*Apraśastā*,’ ‘*Alakṣaṇā*.’

“What is the difference between ‘auspicious’ and ‘benedictory’?”

None whatsoever. The second epithet has been added only for the purpose
of filling up the metre.—(33)


