+++
title = "036 गर्भाष्टमे ऽब्दे"

+++
Counting from the year that one spends in the mother’s womb, when the
child reaches the eighth year;—the term ‘*garbha*’ stands for the *year*
spent in the womb; this indication being due to the presence of the term
‘year,’ ‘*abda*’; certainly the ‘year’ could never be the ‘eighth’ from
‘*garbha*,’ if this latter were taken in its direct sense;—in this year
*one should perform the Initiation of the Brāhmaṇa*.

The term ‘*aupanāyanam*’ stands for ‘*upamyanam*,’ the ‘*aṇ*’ affix
having the reflexive sense; and the lengthening of the vowel in the
latter term (‘*nayanam*’) being in accordance with (*Pāṇini* 6.3.198);
or the lengthening of the vowels of both terms (‘*upa*’ and ‘*nayanam*’)
may be regarded as a Vedic anomaly.

‘*Upanayana*,’ ‘Initiation,’ is the name of a sacrament described in the
*Gṛhyasūtras* and well-known to Vedic scholars, its other name is
‘*Mauñjī-bandha*,’ ‘*Girdle-Investiture*.’ That ceremony in which the
child is taken over to—made over to—(*upanīyate*)—the teacher, for the
purposes of teaching—and not for any such other purpose as the building
of a Avail, or the making of a mat—is what is called ‘*Upanayana*.’ It
is the name of a particular sacramental rite.

‘*Of the King in the eleventh year from conception*’;—for the
*Kṣatṭriya* the ceremony should be performed in the eleventh year ‘*from
conception*,’—*i.e*., ‘*beginning* *from* conception,’ or ‘*after*
conception.’

The term ‘king’ ‘*rājan*’ (in ‘*rājñaḥ*’) should he taken as standing
for the Kṣatriya caste; and does not necessarily mean one who is a duly
anointed king; firstly because such is the sense in which the word is
generally used in books; secondly because in the present context it
occurs along with the terms ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ and the rest (which are all
denotative of *castes*); and thirdly because we find the term
‘*Kṣatriya*’ used in the rules that follow regarding the details of the
ceremony; *e.g*., it is raid that ‘the girdle of the Kṣatriya should
consist of the bow-string’ (below, Verse 12). It is true that the term
‘king’ is sometimes used in the sense of the ‘rulers’ of ‘countries,’
and as such applied to *Vaiśyas* and other castes also; but such usage
is purely figurative and indirect. And the figurative meaning of a word
can be accepted only when the original direct meaning is found
inapplicable. That the term ‘king’ in the text stands for the *Kṣatriya*
is shown by the following words of the author of the *Gṛhya-sutra*—‘One
should initiate the Brāhmaṇa in the eighth year, the *Kṣatriya* in the
eleventh and the Vaiśya in the twefth.’ It is on this understanding that
the revered Pāṇini derives the word ‘*rājya*’ (‘Kingship’) from the word
‘*rājan*’ (King), explaining it as ‘the function the King,’ and hence
used in the ordinary sense of ‘lord of country’ \[ *i.e*., the ‘function
of ruling a country’ really belongs to the Kṣatriya caste, and when
persons of other castes arc called ‘King’ their title is based upon
their doing ‘the work of the King’\].

*Of the Vaiśya, the ceremony should be performed in the twelfth year
from conception*.—(86)


