+++
title = "037 ब्रह्मवर्चस-कामस्य कार्यो"

+++
What belongs to the father is here attributed to the child; the
desire—‘May my sou attain Brahmic glory!’—resides in the father; and
this desire being attributed to the child, the latter is spoken of as
‘desirous of Brahmic glory.’ The child itself is too youug to have the
said desire.

“In that case the action done by one person would have its result
accruing to a totally different person; and this would involve the
absurdity of a man acquiring what he has not earned. And the assertion
that the result accrues to the child without his desiring it is one that
is contrary to all reason and scriptural authority.”

There is no force in the objection. The case in question is analogous to
that of the *Śyena* sacrifice: the *Śyena* is performed by a man seekiug
to encompass death, and this death falls upon the person against whom
the performance is aimed (and not on the performer himself). It might be
argued that—“in this case the result actually accrues to the person
seekiug for it; it is the sacrificer who desires the death of his enemy;
and it is he who obtains this result; so that the result of the act does
not accrue to a person that did not perform it.”—But in the present case
also, the result, in the shape of ‘having a child with the particular
qualification,’ accrues to the performer of the Initiation (the father);
just as the good health of the child brings pleasure to the father, so
also the Brahmic glory of the son would be a source of pleasure to the
father; so that the result here also would accrue to the performer, who
had sought for it. Further, it is only from the construction of the
actual words used that we can ascertain the meaning of the scriptural
texts; and in the present context, the only construction found possible
is that the father should perform the ceremony with the desire of a
certain result to accrue to his son; and there are no grounds for
abandoning this natural construction of the words.

This same explanation applies also to the case of the benefits of the
after-death rites accruing to the father (even though performed by the
son); as in that case also the performer is the son, and the result is
the satisfaction of the father. Further, we have the text—‘Thou art my
very self called the. *non*’—which shows that when the after-death rites
are performed by the *son*, it is the father himself (iṇ the shape of
the son) that makes the offerings to himself; specially as it was with a
view to this alone that the father begot the son.

Then again, in the *Sarvasvāra* sacrifice (which is performed by one who
wishes to bring about his own death and translation to heaven),—even
after the sacrificer himself has died, the subsequent details have got
to he performed: and in this performance also the same sacrificer is
regarded as the ‘performer,’ in view of the direction that he has given
fo the Brāhmaṇas—‘O brāhmaṇas, please complete this sacrifice,’—as also
of the sacrificial gifts and appointments made by him; by virtue of
which the said sacrificer is regarded as the actual instigator or
employer of the officiating priests. In the same manner, in the case in
question also, in as much as the son was begotten for the purpose of
performing the funeral rites, these rites, though performed (by the son)
for the sake of the father, are regarded as performed by the father
himself.


