+++
title = "038 आ षोदशाद्"

+++
For the Initiatory Rite, the principal as well as the optional time have
been prescribed. From this it would seem that if, on account of the
death of the father, or by reason of illness and such other causes, the
boy remains uninitiated and the prescribed time has gone by,—he becomes
unfit, for initiation; this idea being countenanced by the faot that,
even though the prescribed time is a secondary factor in the rite, yet
on the lapse of that time, the performer’s title to the performance
ceases; just as we find in the case of omission of the *Agnihotra*
-offerings after the prescribed morning and evening have gone by. It is
with a view to this that the present verse propounds an exception to the
general rule, and lays down the necessity of performing the rite even
after the passing off of the prescribed time.

Till the end of the sixteenth year after conception, the Brāhmaṇa’s
title to the Initiatory Bite does not cease. The term ‘*Sāvitrī*’ in the
text stands for the ‘Rite of Initiation,’ which is the means whereby the
teaching of the is accomplished. ‘*Does not lapse,’ i.e*., does not
become out of date.

Similarly ‘*for the Kṣatriya till the twenty-second year*,’—*i.e*., for
the person belonging to the Kṣatriya *caste*. Tho term ‘*bandhu*’ is
used (*a*) sometimes in a deprecatory sense; *e.g*., in such passages
as—‘how doth thou know this. O Brahma-bandhu! (wretched
Brāhmaṇa)?’;—(*b*) sometimes it is used in the sense of ‘*family*’;
*e.g*., in the passage—‘the possession of a number of villages, the
presence of a large following, extensive family-connections (), and
alliances,—these are not to be trifled with even by Indra himself; what
to say of persons possessing only parts of the earth!’;—(*c*) in some
cases it also means ‘substance’; *e.g*., in Pāṇiṇi’s Sutra (5.4.9)—‘a
word ending with the term *jāṭi* takes the affix *ca*, when it denotes
*bandhu (i.e*., a substance belonging to a particular class).’ In the
present context the first two meanings of the term ‘*bandhu*’ being
inapplicable, we take it in the third sense.

The nominal affix (*ḍaṭ*) in the term ‘*dvāviṃśaḥ*’ means that which
completes the number twenty-two, *i.e*., the *twenty-second*.

‘*For the Vaiśya till the twenty-fourth year*’.—Here also though the
presence of the ‘*ḍaṭ*’-affix implying completion was necessary, yet it
has not been used in view of metrical contingencies; but the sense is
there all the same. That this must be so is proved by the fact that the
number ‘twenty-four,’ which denotes the entire lot of twenty-four years,
could never form the limit of anything; while tine ‘*twenty-fourth
year'* which is one part of the ‘*twenty-four*,’ can very well form the
limit.

People explain the particle ‘*ā*’ as denoting inclusion.

In support of what is said in this verse people cite the Vedic text—‘The
Brāhmaṇa should be initiated with the *Gāyatrī*, the Kṣatriya with the
and the Vaiśya with the *Jagatī*’ \[the *Gāyatrī* metre containing 24,
three times *eight*, the *Tṛṣtup* 33, three times *eleven*, and the
*Jagatī*, 48, four times *twelve*, syllables\]; the ages spoken of in
the text (16, 22 and 24) suffice to complete two quarters of each of the
three metres; up till then the metres retain their force and do ṇot
abandon the castes that form their receptacles; when however the third
quarter has passed, they lose their essence, become aged and having
their force reduced, they disappaer, just as the man becomes *old* at 50
(which represents two quarters of his life of 100 years). It is for this
reason that the said metres abandon their respective castes, when they
find that they have not been studied by them; and it is thus that (after
the said ages) the Brāhmaṇa ceases to be ‘related to the *Gāyatrī*,’ the
Kṣatriya ceases to be ‘related to the *Triṣṭup*’ and the Vaiśya ceases
to be ‘related to the *Jagatī*.’

‘*Sāvitrī*’—is the name of that verse which has for its deity; and that
such a verse is the *Gāyatrī* has been shown above, on the strength of
the *Gṛhyasūtras*.

For the Kṣatriya, the ‘*Sāvitrī*’ is the verse ‘*Ākṛṣṇena, etc*.’
(Ṛgveda, 1.35-2; Vājasaneya, 33.43), which is in the *Triṣṭup* metre;
and for the Vaiśya, it is the verse ‘*Viśvā rūpāṇi*, etc.’ Ṛgveda,
5.81.2; Vājasaneya, 12.3).—(38)


