+++
title = "040 नैतैर् अपूतैर्"

+++
‘*With these*’—Vrātyas;—‘*until purified*’—by expiatory rites;—‘*duly,’
i.e*., according to rules laid down in the scriptures laying down
expiatory rites; *e.g*., ‘making them undergo three *Kṛcchras, etc.,
etc*.;’—‘*even in times of distress*’—*i.e*., under no circumstances
however distressful;—‘*should not establish*,’ enter into,
‘*relationship*’ with them.

The question arising as to whether or not this prohibits all kinds of
relationship, the text supplies the answer in the negative—‘*spiritual
or* *uterine* .’

The term ‘*brāhma,’ ‘spirit*,’ here stands for the Veda; and it is
relationships through the Veda that are prohibited; such relationships
as officiating at sacrifices, teaching and accepting gifts; the meaning
being that one should neither officiate at their sacrificial
performances, nor appoint them to officiate at sacrifices, they should
not be taught, nor should one read with them. Since it is only one who
knows the meaning of the Veda that is entitled to accept gifts, the
accepting of gifts also becomes a ‘Vedic’ or ‘spiritual’ relationship.

‘*Uterine relationship*,’—the giving and taking of daughters in
marriage.

The specification of the ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ is intended to be illustrative
only.

The sense of all this is that, in view of the disqualification here
described, the boy whose father is no more should, if he is intelligent,
try to avoid the disqualification, by presenting himself (at the proper
time) for Initiation. To this end we have the *Śruti*—“Satyakāma Jābāla
went to Gautama Hāridrumata and said—‘I shall, sir, live with you as a
religious student”; where the boy himself requested the teacher to
inflate him. The initiating of boys is however entirely optional; so
that if the teacher should be found unwilling to take up the initiation,
be should be appealed to by the boy by means of presents, etc.—(40)


