+++
title = "041 कार्ष्ण-रौरव-बास्तानि चर्माणि"

+++
Though the term ‘*Kṛṣna*,’ ‘*black*,’ is applied to everything that may
be endowed with the quality of *blackness*,—as we find in the
expressions ‘the black cow,’ ‘the black blanket,’ and so forth,—yet, in
the present context, it is clearly recognised as standing for the ‘black
deer’; firstly because of its occurring along with the ‘skin of the
*Ruru* deer,’ and secondly because of the directions contained in other
*Smṛtis* (which clearly mention the *black deer*).

‘*Ruru*’—is a particular species of the deer.

‘*Basta*’—is the *goat*.

In all the three words (‘*kārṣṇa*’—‘*raurava*’—‘*vāsta*’) the nominal
affix (*aṇ*) denotes either *formation* or *constitution* (*i.e*.,
either ‘formed out of’ or ‘consisting of’).

‘*Should wear*’;—the Brāhmaṇa should cover his body with the skin of the
black antelope, the Kṣatriya with the skin of the *Ruru* deer and the
Vaiśya with the skin of the goat.

*And also cloth* made of *śaṇa* (hemp), *kṣumā* (flax), and *ūrṇā*
(wool).

The particle ‘*ca*’ (‘and also’) has the cumulative force.

The cloth made of hemp and the rest are not to be used as *upper*
garments; and the skins are to be used as upper garments; as such is the
proper course. For *Kaupīna* (loin-slip) and *wrapping*, the cloth is to
be used.

‘*Respecting*’ each of the three castes is not related to all the
clothing that is mentioned; nor are they to be connected in the reverse
order; in fact the first Brahmacārī is connected with the first skin and
first cloth, the second with the second and so forth, as we have shown.

An objection is raised—“Even without the express mention (of the
respective order), it would be understood through usage; for instance,
such expressions as ‘shattered, scattered an d burnt by thunder, wind
and fire’ are always understood to mean ‘shattered by thunder,’
‘scattered by the wind’ and ‘burnt by fire’ (even though *respectivity*
is not expressly mentioned).”

*Answer*.—This could be so understood if the three *Brahma-charts* bad
been mentioned separately, and if the number (of Brahmacāris and the
clothings) were the same. In the present instance, however, we have the
single term ‘Brahmacāris,’ and the three Brahmacāris are not
specifically named in any order. Further, the number of Brahmacāris is
*three*, while that of the correlatives is *six*—three skins and three
cloths. When however the text expressly mentions ‘respectivity,’ the
order of the Brāhmacāris is deduced from that in which they are found to
be spoken of in other texts. And after the ‘three Brahmacharis’ have
been construed with the three *skins*, they are again repeated and
construed with the *cloths*. And in.this manner the compatibility of
numbers is maintained. It is primarily with reference to such cases that
the revered Pāṇini has taken the trouble of laying down that ‘when an
equal number of things are mentioned they are to be taken in their
respective order.’ (1.3.10).—(41)


