+++
title = "042 मौञ्जी त्रिवृत्"

+++
The *muñja* is a particular kind of grass; the cord made of that grass
is called ‘*Mauñjī*.’ This cord should form the ‘girdle,’ hraid,
waist-band. ‘*Threefold*’—triple-corded;—‘*of even thickness*’—not such
as is thin in one part and thinner in another; but such as is even
throughout;—‘*soft and smooth*,’ of soft texture, well-rubbed.

‘*For the Kṣatriya the bow-string*’;—the string of the bow. The
bow-string is made sometimes of leathern thong, sometimes of grass or of
fibres of hemp or flax; hence the text specifies it as that ‘*made of
murvā grass*’; this string should be taken down from the bow and made
into the waist-band.

Even though the qualifications of *triplicity* and the rest apply
literally to all kinds of ‘girdle,’ and not only to that of *muñja
grass*, yet they cannot be applied to the ‘bow-string,’ as with such
qualifications it would entirely lose its character of ‘bow-string.’

‘*Made of hempen fibres*’;—the lengthening of the vowel in the second
number of the compound is an archaism. Or, we may take the term
‘*tāntavī*’ by itself formed with the nominal affix added to the term
‘*tantu*’ only, and then compound the term ‘*tāntavī*’ with the term
‘*śaṇa*’; since the ‘*tāntavī,’ the fibre*, is a product of the
‘*śaṇa*,’ *hemp*, it is naturally spoken of as related to its source
(the hemp) \[hence the compound *śaṇānām tāntavī*—‘*śaṇatāntavī*’; as we
find in such expressions as ‘the cow’s butter,’ ‘Deva-datta’s grand son’
and so forth\]. This hempen cord should be made like that of the *Muñja*
cord; as the author of the Gṛhyasūtras have clearly laid down that the
Vaiśya’s girdle should have the qualities of *triplicity* and the
rest.—(42)


