+++
title = "043 मुञ्जालाभे तु"

+++
Writers declare that the phrase ‘and the rest’ is understood, the sense
being ‘in the event of Muñja *and the rest* being not available.’ And
the reason for this is that it is only thus that the plural number
‘should be made,’ becomes more appropriate; specially as the diversity
of the girdle has been clearly prescribed in accordance with the
diversity of castes. If the girdle spoken of in the present verse were
meant for that of any one caste only, then the plural number could be
justified only by taking it as referring to the girdle worn by the
endless individual members of that one caste; and further, it would be
necessary in this case to alter the singular number in ‘*viprasya*’ (of
the preceding verse) into the plural number (to bring it into conformity
with the present verse); and lastly, in this case all the three
alternatives herein mentioned would have to be taken as pertaining to
the one girdle (of the Brāhmaṇa only). And no such multiplicity of
option should be allowed so long as there is any other way of taking the
text.

Thus then the sense of the present verse is as follows—(*a*) if *Muñja*
is not available, the girdle should be made of *Kuśa*; if the
*bow-string* is not available, it should be made of *Ashmantaka*; and
(*c*) if the hempen fibre is not available it should be made of
*Balvaja*.

The terms ‘*kuśa*,’ etc., denote grasses and herbs.

This verse is meant to restrict the choice of substitutes; so that in
the absence of *kuśa*, etc., one would not be justified in using any
other similar substances.

*Triplicated by one knot*. The various numbers (of knots) are not meant
to be restricted to the three castes respectively; they are intended to
be optional alternatives for every one of them. This difference in the
number of knots in the girdle made of kuśa, etc., as well as the other
details laid down in connection with it are to be regarded as regular
injunctions, even though the customs laid down in other Smṛtis are not
necessarily binding.—(43)


