+++
title = "044 कार्पासम् उपवीतम्"

+++
The term ‘*upavīta*’ stands for the peculiar manner in which cloth is
worn; as will be explained later in Verse 63; as such, it is only a
*quality*; and since this *quality* cannot be *made of cotton*, the
quality is taken as standing for the thing to which the quality belongs;
the meaning being that the *thing* that is to be worn in the particular
way should be made of cotton; the term ‘*upavītam*’ being regarded as
formed with the ‘*ach*’ affix, according to Pāṇini 5.2.127, ‘*upavītam*’
being equivalent to ‘*upavītavat*.’

‘*Twisted upwards*’—*i.e*., turned round, coiled upwards.

‘*Triple*’—consisting of three yarns.

This ‘*twisting upwards*’ is laid down for that article which, on coming
out of the spinning wheel, has acquired the properties of the ‘yarn’ and
has then been folded three times. That is to say, three yarns should be
brought together and by upward twisting made into a cord, and then used
as the ‘sacred thread.’ Of this cord, either only one or three or five
or seven should be worn. It comes to be known as the ‘*sacrificial*
thread’ by reason of its being connected with sacrificial performances;
in as much as it is worn for the purposes of sacrificial performances,
it is so called figuratively.

Now, of the three kinds of sacrifice, the *Iṣṭi*, the *Paśu* and the
*Soma* sacrifices, it may be worn single at all these, when they are all
looked upon as ‘sacrifices’ in general (and hence, uniform); or it may
be worn three-fold, when they are looked upon either as performed with
the help of *three* fires, or as being divided into the *three* classes
of ‘*Ahīna*,’

‘*Ekāha*’ and ‘*Satra*’; or again, it may be worn seven-fold, in view of
the number of stages in the Soma sacrifice being *seven*; or lastly, it
may be worn five-fold, in view of there being *three* ‘Savanas’
(extractions of Soma-juice) and two ‘*Sandhyās*’ (twilights).

\[In the absence of Cotton\], the ‘Thread’ may be made of silk and other
fibres also; such is the direction given ill other *Smṛtis*.

‘*Avi*’ is *sheep*; the yarn made of wool is ‘woolen fibre’; the term
‘*ārik?sūtrikam*’ being formed with the ‘*ṭhañ*’ affix, according to the
*Vārtika on* Paṇini 4.3.60. Or, we may read ‘*avikasūtrikam*’ this word
being formed with the ‘*ṭhan*’ affix having the sense of the
possessive.—(14)


