+++
title = "045 ब्राह्मणो बैल्व-पालाशौ"

+++
Even though the text uses the Copulative Compound (which implies that
two staves have to be carried), yet, in as much as in connection with
the detailed qualifications of the staff laid down in the text, we find
the singular number used,—*e.g*., in the next verse, and in Verse 18
below,—it is understood that only one staff is to be carried; specially
as in the *Gṛhya-sūtra* we read—‘the Brāhmaṇa’s *staff*’ is of Bilva or
Palāśa’; and the Gautama-sūtra speaks of the carrying of *one* staff
only. In the present context all that is done is to lay down the mere
possibility of the staff; the expression ‘should have staves’ meaning
that the said staves are fit for Brahmacārīs. As regards the question as
to the act during which the staff is to be held, we shall have the
answer in Verse 48 below; so that the *staff* being only an auxiliary to
that act, the singular number used in that verse must be regarded as
significant. For these reasons the

Dual number used in the present verse must be taken merely as referring
to all possible staves; just like the plural number in the assertion—‘if
God were to give rain *many persons* would take to cultivation.’

‘*Bilva*,’ ‘*Palāśa*,’ ‘*Vaṭa*,’ ‘*Khadira’ Pīlu*’ and ‘*bara*’ are
names of particular species of trees.

‘*Bailva*’ means ‘made of Bilva’; and so with the rest.

The naming of the woods is meant to be merely illustrative; as the
general rule is that ‘staves made of sacred woods are fit for all
castes’ (*Gautama* 1.1.24).

These staves the Brahmacārīs ‘*should* *have*’ during the act to be
described below (in 48);—‘*by law*’—*i.e*., in accordance with
scriptural injunctions.—(45)


