+++
title = "049 भवत्-पूर्वञ् चरेद्"

+++
The word ‘*bhaikṣam*’ here stands for the words with which the request
for alms is preferred; as it is only the words that can have ‘*bhavat*’
as the ‘beginning’; the food itself could not have any such beginning.

In as much as it is laid down that ladies are the first to be begged
from first, and in the request made it is the person begged from that is
addressed, it is the feminine vocative form of the term ‘*bhavat*’ that
should be used.

All that the present text does is to lay down the order of the words to
he used, there being some transcendental purpose served by the order.
The actual words used should be—‘*bhavati bhikṣām dehi*,’ ‘O Lady, give
me food.’

*Question*,—“ Wherefore could there be any possibility of

Sanskrit words being used, since they are addressed to women, and they
do not understand Sanskrit

*Answer*.—The Initiatory ceremony, being compulsory, is of an eternal
character; and it is in connection with this ceremony that the use of
the words is laid down. The vernaculars (corrupt languages) are not
eternal; so that there could be no connection between these and an
eternal ceremony. Then again, just as when educated people hear corrupt
forms of words used, they are reminded, by the resemblance, of the
corresponding correct forms and thereby come to comprehend the
meaning;—for instance, the (incorrect) word ‘*?ā*’ leads to the
inference (remembrance of) of the (correct) word ‘*go'* through
similarity, according to the theory that ‘the incorrect word is
expressive only by inference, and the meaning is comprehended from the
inferred correct word’; in the same manner when correct words are
addressed to women, they remember, through similarity, the corresponding
incorrect words whoso meaning they know, and thus they come to
comprehend the; meaning of the words used. Further, the expression in
question is a short, one consisting of three words only, and these being
well-known words, they would be easily comprehensible by ladies also.

Similarly the *Kṣatriya* should use words of which the ‘*bhavat*’ forms
the middle; the actual form being ‘*bhikṣām bhavati dehi*,’ ‘Give me, O
Lady, food.’ So the Vaiśya should use words of which ‘*bhavat*’ forms
the end. The word ‘*bhavaduttaram*’ means ‘that of which *bhavat* forms
the end’;—the compound thus standing for the sentence (give me food, O
Lady’).

‘*Having undergone Initiation*’;—the past-participial ending implies
that the rule laid down here is to be observed also in connection with
the begging for food for daily living (even after the first day of the
initiation); and further, what is said in verse 68 below—‘such is the
procedure of initiation for the twice-born’—is a summing up of the whole
section on ‘Initiation’; and hence shows that the rule laid down in the
present verse applies also to that begging for alms whicḥ forms part of
the ceremony of Initiation. If we do not take it thus, then what is laid
down here would only he taken either as a part of the Initiation-rites
(as shown by the context), or as applying to the ordinary begging for
food;—in this latter case the implication of the context would be
rejected and stress would be laid only upon the sense of the
past-participial ending (‘having undergone Initiation’) As a matter of
fact, what is here prescribed is applicable to that ‘begging for food’
which forms part of the Initiatory Rites, as also to that which is done
for the purposes of livelihood.—(49)


