+++
title = "051 समाहृत्य तु"

+++
The term ‘*having collected*’ shows that the food should be obtained
from several ladies, and a large quantity should not be obtained from a
single lady.

‘*It*’—refers to that which has gone immediately before this, *i.e*.,
the food begged for ordinary eating, and not that which is done as part
of the Initiation-rites, with which the context deals; specially as with
regard to the latter all that the Gṛḥya-Sūtra prescribes is that the
food should be ‘cooked,’ and nothing is said regarding ‘eating.’
Further, the injunction that ‘the boy should fast for the rest of the
day’ shows that the boy undergoes the Initiatory rite *after breakfast*;
so that the actual *eating* of the food cannot be part of that rite.

‘*As much os way he needed*’;—*i.e*., just as much food as may be
necessary for the satisfaction of hunger; large quantities of food
should not be begged.

‘*Having offered it without guile to the Teacher*;’—*i.e*., he should
not show the teacher only the inferior articles of food, hiding with
these the superior ones, with the view that the Teacher would not take
any thing out of the inferior articles. The ‘*offering*’ consists of
presenting it to him, saying ‘this is what I have obtained.’

What the teacher does not take, ‘*he should eat*,’ after having been
permitted by the teacher to do so.

“Why should not the *offering* be regarded merely as an act producing in
the food some transcendental effect (and not as a real offering meant to
be accepted by the teacher)?”

That it is not so is proved by historical evidence: says the revered
Vyāsa in the story of *Hṛtakūpa*, where it is distinctly stated that the
teacher actually took what was offered.

That the boy should eat only after being permitted to do so, is laid
down in several *Gṛhyasūtras*.

‘*With his face to the east, after having sipped tenter*.’—Some people
have asserted that *the facing of the east* is meant to be connected
with the sipping of water,—the two being in close proximity. But this is
not right; as the rule regarding *sipping*—that it should be done with
the face towards the east or north,—will come later on. Hence what is
mentioned here is connected with the *eating*.

‘*Pure*.’—This means that after *rinsing the mouth* he should avoid,
during meals, such tilings as looking at the *Cāṇḍāla* going to unclean
places, spitting and so forth.—(51)


