+++
title = "052 आयुष्यम् प्राङ्-मुखो"

+++
The preceding verse has laid down the general compulsory rule that the
boy should eat with his face to the East, if he is not desirous of
obtaining any peculiar results; the text is now laying down rules that
are to he observed with a view to definite desired ends.

‘*Āyuṣyam*’—is that which is conducive to longevity; and ‘*Eating with
face to the East, one does what is coducive to longevity*’; when the act
of eating brings about longevity, it becomes ‘*what is conducive to
longevity* ’; hence the meaning of the text comes to be that ‘if one
desires longevity he should eat with face to the East.’ Thus then, in
regard to the East, there are two directions—(*a*) one should *always*
face the East, and (*b*) one should do so when desiring the said result;
so that if a man desires longevity, he should actually have the
particular desire in view; while in the other case he should not have
any result in view. Just as, though the *Agnihotra* is an obligatory
act, yet if the man seeks heaven, he repeats its performance; and by so
doing he fulfills, incidentally, the obligations of the obligatory act
also.

Similarly, when one desires fame, he should face the South. All these
rules are optional.

*Desiring prosperity*—the form ‘*Shriyan*’ is formed by adding the
present participial affix ‘*śatṛ*’ to the nominal root formed by adding
‘*kyach*’ to the noun ‘*Śrī*’ Or, we may read ‘*Shriyam*’ ending in *m*;
the meaning being ‘*what brings prosperity*’; just as in the case of the
other words ‘*āyuṣyam*’ and the rest.

The use of the root ‘*bhuj*,’ ‘to eat,’ in its literal sense becomes
possible, if we regard ‘longevity’ and the rest as ‘parts of a living
being’; the same explanation applies also to the next clause ‘he eats
what leads to the true.’ The meaning thus comes to be that by‘eating
with face to the west one obtains prosperity.’ In this case we have the
reading ‘*shriyam*’ with the Accusative ending. Or, lastly we may read
‘*shriyai*,’ with the Dative ending, which would signify ‘for the sake
of.’

‘*True*’ means the *real*, and also the *sacrifice* or Heaven as
resulting from the sacrifice. The sense thus is that ‘if one seeks
heaven he should eat with his face to the north.’

Even though we have no Injunctive affixes in the text, yet, since what
is here laid down is something not already known, we take it in the
sense of an Injunction, construing the Present Tense as denoting the
*fifth* sense (*Leṭ*, which is expressive of Injunction).

Thus then we have this rule of eating with face to various directions,
with a view to various results.

Eating with face towards the subsidiary quarters, which one might be
tempted to do undor special circumstances, becomes precluded by the
obligatory injunction of facing the *East*, etc.

The optional rule here laid down does not apply only to the Religious
Student, nor to the eating of the food obtained by begging only, but to
all forms of eating by the Householder and others also. That this is so
is indicated by the fact that though in the context we have all along
had the Injunctive word ‘*aśnīyāt*,’ the present veise has used a
different word ‘*bhuṅkte*’; if the author had definitely intended the
present rule to be as restricted in its application as those that have
gone before, then he would have used the same word. When however we find
him making use of a different word, ‘*bhuṅkte*,’ we begin to doubt if
what is meant is the particular eating that has been hitherto dealt with
in the context, or a general rule applying to all forms of eating; and
the conclusion we are led to is that since a different verb is used, it
must stand for a different act, and it cannot be regarded as the same
that has been dealt with in the context.

Some people have argued that—“in as much as there is no injunctive word
in the present verse, it must be taken as merely laudatory of what has
gone before.” But this has been answered in *Mīmāmsā Sūtra* 3.5.21
(where it is asserted that sentences laying down things not already
known are to be regarded as *injunctive*). Nor do we find in the present
verse any such signs as would indicate that it is meant to be subsidiary
to the preceding verse,—such signs, for instance, as the fact of its
being wanting in some integral part, if taken apart from the preceding
verse, and so forth. It is possible to take the present verse as
referring primarily to the Religious Student only, and then to extend
its application to all men,—on the ground that what is laid down here is
not incompatible with the duties of ordinary men, as the other duties of
the Student are; but in that case the results mentioned in the verse
would not accrue to the ordinary man. For authoritative writers 8.1.23,
etc.) do not admit of activity by mere implied extension, in cases of
special results following from the use of special accessory details. If
such rules as ‘for one desiring cattle, water should be fetched in the
milking vessel,’ ‘the sacrificial post should be of *khadira* wood when
the man desires vigour,’ are never applied to the case of those
sacrifices which are mere ectypes (of the Darśapūrṇāmāsa); and to which
the details of the Darśapūrṇamāsa become applicable by extended
implication only.—(52)


