+++
title = "053 उपस्पृश्य द्विजो"

+++
The terms ‘*ācamana*’ and ‘*spṛśa*’ are both synonymous, being found
from the usage of cultured people, to signify a particular purificatory
act. Though it is true that the root ‘*spraha*’ has been declared to
have an entirely different meaning, and the root ‘*chamu*’ (from which
the word ‘*ācamana*’ is derived) also has been declared to signify the
act of *eating*,—yet in actual usage we find that with the particular
prefixes (*upa* and *a*) they are used in a much restricted sense and
hence they are taken in that (restricted) sense. So that even though the
root ‘*spṛśa*’ has a very wide denotation, yet actual usage limits its
significance. Just as though the root ‘*gaḍi*’ denotes only part of the
face in general, the term ‘*gaṇḍa*’ (derived from that root) is used in
the sense of tho *cheek* only, and it is not applied to any other part
of the face; similarly the root ‘*puṣya*’ means *to accomplish*, and the
term ‘*puṣya*’ is laid down as denoting ‘lunar, asterism’ in general,
yet in actual usage this latter name is applied to one particular
asterism only; similarly again the term ‘*dhāyyā*,’ though laid down as
denoting *Sāmidhenī* verses in general, is actually used in the sense of
the *Āvāpikī* verses only. Hence the term ‘*upaspṛśya*’ means exactly
what is meant by the term ‘*ācamya*’; the actual injunction of this act
of ‘*ācamana*’ will come later on. Further, the text itself uses the two
terms as synonymous. Having laid down that ‘one should always do the
*shana*,’ it goes on to say that ‘this *ācamana*’ should be done three
times; from which it is clear that the two are synonymous.

Though the ‘rinsing of the mouth’ has been already laid down in verse
51, it is re-iterated again in order to show immediate sequence: the
sense being that one should take his food *immediately after* rinsing
the mouth, and no other act should be allowed to intervene. To this end
we have the following declaration of the revered Vyāsa—‘Oh Lord, I shall
remain with such people as take their food with five limbs wet’—this
being said by Lakṣmī; the ‘five limbs’ being the two hands, two feet,
and month; and these five limbs can remain wet only if one cats
immediately after the rinsing, and not if he makes any delay. Manu
himself (in 4. 76) is going to declare under the duties of the Snātaka
that ‘one should eat with the feet still wet’; and there we shall show
that there is no needless repetition involved in this.

‘*Always*’—this is added in order to guard against the notion that being
laid down in the section dealing with the duties of the Student, what is
here prescribed applies to him alone; and to show directly that it is
applicable to every form of eating.

Some people have held that “the term ‘twice-born’ is what is meant to
make the rule applicable to every form of eating, and that the ‘always’
is merely an explanatory reiteration.”

This however is not right. This would have been the right explanation if
the qualification ‘twice-bom’ were incompatible with the ‘student’; as a
matter of fact however, the said qualification is quite applicable to
the ‘student’; hence with the exception of the adverb ‘always’ there is
nothing to indicate that what is here laid down is to be taken as going
beyond the particular context.

‘*With due care*’—That is, with due consideration of the character of
the food and his own (digestive) powers. If one happens to be
absent-minded, he cannot avoid indigestible, unwholesome and hot food,
nor can he eat only what is wholesome.

‘*After having eaten, he should rinse his mouth*.’—That one should
remove all traces of oil, etc., has been already prescribed under the
section on the ‘purification of substances.’ The ‘rinsing’ here laid
down is that which one should do after he has eaten and removed all
traces of oil, etc.

In this connection some people have held that one ‘rinsing’ (after food)
having been already laid down under 5. 145—where it is said that ‘one
should rinse his mouth after sleep, sneezing and eating,’—the present
verse must be taken as laying down a second ‘rinsing,’ for the purposes
of some transcendental result; there being such a general injunction as
‘having rinsed the mouth, one should rinse it again.’

This aspect of the question wo shall deal with under Discourse V.

*In the proper manner*.—This only re-iterates the injunctive and
obligatory character of the ‘rinsing’; the meaning being that ‘one
should follow all the details of the Binning that have been enjoined.’

‘*Should touch with water the cavities*.’—‘Cavities,’ *i.e*., holes in
the head.

*Objection*.—“It is already laid down (under 60, below) that the
cavities should be touched with water.”

To this some people reply that the repetition in the present verse is
meant to exclude the ‘self’ and ‘head’ (which also are mentioned along
with the ‘cavities’ in 60),—and refers to that rinsing which one already
clean, does, without reference to *Eating*. So that according to those
who take the first ‘rinsing’ after food as meant for cleanliness and a
second ‘rinsing’ as lending to some transcendental result,—the ‘self’
and the ‘head’ are not ‘touched with water’ for the purpose of bringing
about a transcendental result; this being done for cleanliness alone.
The actual process of this rinsing is going to he laid down in 61.—‘One
desirous of cleanliness should always rinse his mouth, etc., etc..’

Another answer to the aforesaid objection is that what the present verse
does is to emphasise the fact of the being recognised as something
enjoined by the scriptures; the sense being that this *Rinsing* is the
*scriptural* (prescribed in the Śāstras), not the *ordinary*, rinsing.
As a matter of fact, where a certain primary act has become known as
equipped with particular accessories, wherever that same act is
subsequently spoken of, it is at once recognised as being the same as
the former one. So that when the text says ‘*should rinse his mouth*,’
it does not mean merely that a certain substance (water) should be
sipped; what is meant is to indicate all that has been prescribed in
connection with the scriptural purification, along with its appurtenent
details.—(53)


