+++
title = "054 पूजयेद् अशनम्"

+++
‘*Food*,’ ‘*aśana*,’ is *that which in eaten (aśyate), i.e*., rice and
curry, etc. When the food is brought to him, he should look upon it as a
‘deity’; *i.e*., he should have the notion—‘this food is my highest
deity.’ (*a*) The ‘worshipping’ of the food may consist in regarding it
as the source of the birth and sustenance of all living beings; or (*b*)
in regarding it as the means of sustaining his life; as the food is
declared to have said—‘he worships me regarding me as sustaining life’;
or (*c*) in receiving it with due obeisance, etc.

‘*He should eat it without disparaging it*’;—even when there is any such
source of disparagement as that the article of food is of bad quality,
or it is badly cooked, he should not disparage the food; *i.e*., he
should not make any such disparaging remarks as—‘this is most
disagreeable,’ or ‘it is likely to upset the constitution of the body,’
and so forth. If the food happens to be really defective, he should
simply *not* eat it; he should not eat it and yet find fault with it.

‘*When he sees it he should rejoice*’—he should rejoice just as he does
when, on returning from a long journey, he sees his wife and children.

‘*He should feel gratified*’;—on seeing the food, he should remove from
his mind even such displeasure as may have been produced by other
causes.

‘*He should welcome it*’;—‘welcoming’ consists in acclaiming it as a
boon; *i.e*., receiving it with honour, with such words as ‘may we have
such food every day.’

‘*Always*,’—at all times. The affix ‘*shas*’ has the sense of the
locative, according to the option involved in Pāṇini’s *Sūtra* 5. 4. 42.
Or, wo may read ‘*sarvadā*’ (instead of ‘*sarvaśaḥ*’).—(54)


