+++
title = "056 नोच्छिष्टङ् कस्य"

+++
The food left in the dish, and become unclean by being touched with the
mouth, is called, ‘*leavings*;’—this he should not give to anyone. The
prohibition of the offering of the leavings to any person being already
contained in this verse, the necessity of having another prohibition of
the offering of the leavings to a *Śūdra*,—which we find among the
duties of the *Snātakā*—we shall explain in connection with the latter
verse.

\[In ‘*Kasyachit*’ \] though the dative would he the proper form, we
have the genitive in the sense of ‘relationship in general,’ and what is
meant is that it should not he given even to such living beings as do
not understand that a certain thing has been given to them,—such for
instance, as dogs and cats; in this latter case the act cannot he called
‘*giving*’ in its full sense; as it involves merely the cessation of the
proprietary right of the giver, it does not involve the producing of the
proprietary right in the recipient \[that is why the Dative could not he
rightly used: which could imply both *giving* and *receiving* \].

The phrase ‘*antarā*’ ‘*in between*,’ means *middle*. There are two
times for meals—morning and evening; and one should not eat between
these meals. Or, ‘*in* *between*’ may mean *interruption*; in which case
the meaning is that ‘having once left off the act of eating, and having
interrupted it by some other act, he should not eat the food left in the
same dish.’ Another *Smṛti* lays down the specific rule that ‘one should
avoid eating interrupted by rising and washing.’ Others again have
explained the phrase ‘*antarā*,’ as meaning *disconnection*. The *Śruti*
having declared that ‘holding the dish with the left hand, ono should
take up the morsel with the right hand and then offer it to the
Life-breath in the mouth,’—it is the *omitting of the act of holding the
dish with the left hand* which is meant by the terms ‘*antarā*.’

‘*Be should not do over-eating*’;—one should not eat too much. This is
with a view to health, and hence implies the avoidance of such food as
may he either indigestible or unsuitable. Specially because the advice
is based upon reason. What is ‘*over-eating*’ can he learnt from the
Āyurveda. The sense is that one should eat only that quantity of food
which does not quite fill the stomach, and which is properly digested.
Of the three parts into which the stomach is divided, one part itself
should bo filled with food, half a part with water, and one part should
be left for the action of the bodily humours. If this is not done,
health suffers.

‘*He should not go anywhere teiṭh particles of food still on him*’;—on
the very spot where he has oaten, he should clean himself by removing
all particles of food from the body and then wash his hands and mouth
without rising from the place.—(50)


