+++
title = "058 ब्राह्मेण विप्रस्"

+++
The term ‘*tīrtha*,’ ‘Receptacle,’ means a clean vessel containing
water; ‘*tīrtha*’ (literally) is that which exists for the purpose of
saving people, *i.e*., freeing them from their sins. In some places
‘*tīrtha*’ is explained as ‘that by which people descend into water.’ In
the present context however it stands for that part of the palm of the
hand which contains water; and we must take the word ‘*tīrtha*’ as
applied to the hand, with a view to eulogise it, only figuratively; for
water does not remain in the hand always (and as such it cannot be
called *tīrtha* in its literal sense).

Through the said receptacle, *he should sip water*.

‘*Dedicated to Brahmā*’;—this also is a figurative eulogy. The term
means ‘that of which Brahmā is the deity’; and certainly the said
‘Receptacle,’ not being of the nature of a ‘sacrifice,’ or of a
‘Mantra,’ could not be said to be ‘dedicated to a deity.’ The special
nominal affix in the word ‘*brāhma*,’ which denotes ‘dedication to a
deity,’ may however be justified on the assumption that the said
receptacle resembles a ‘sacrifice’ in certain characteristics, such as
being the means of sanctification and so forth.

‘*Every time*’—*i.e*., for the purposes of cleanliness, as also as part
of religious performances.

‘*Kāya*’—‘Ka’ stands for Prajāpati: hence ‘*kāya*’ is that which is
dedicated to Prajāpati.

Similarly that which is dedicated to the ‘thrice-ten’—*i.e*., the
Gods—is called the ‘*traidaśikam*.’ The word ‘*traidaśikam*’ is derived
from ‘*tridaśa*’ with the deifìc affix ‘*aṇ*,’ and then the reflexive
‘*ka*.’ And the deific character in this case also is of the same kind
as before (in the term ‘*brāhma*’).

Through these receptacles one should sip water. The mention of the
*Brāhmaṇa* (Vipra) is not meant to be significant here. For special
rules for the *Kṣatriya*, etc., are going to be added later on (in verse
62, *et seq*.); and unless we had a general rule, there could he no room
for specifications \[and it is the present verse alone that could be
taken as formulating that general rule, and hence it could not be taken
as restricted to. the Brāhmaṇa only.\]

‘*Not through that dedicated to the* *Pitṛs*’—*i.e*., never through that
of which the Pitṛs are the deity; even in cases where the aforesaid
parts of the hand are disabled by the presence of boils and pimples.

*Objection*.—“The mere fact of *what is sacred to Pitṛs* not having been
enjoined makes it impossible to be used (why should the negation be
re-iterated)?”

*Answer*.—There is one danger in that: The next verse supplies the
description of ‘the receptacle dedicated to Pitṛs’; while there is no
use for it laid down in the present context; so that when one would
proceed to seek for the use to which this particular receptacle could
lie put, he might form the idea that it is to be used in connection with
the act (*of sipping water*) that forms the subject-matter of the
context. When, h owever, wc have the direct prohibition (of this
receptacle, in connection with *water-sipping*), we gather the use for
it from its very name, and conclude that the offering of water and such
other rites for the *Pitṛs* are to be performed with ‘the receptacle
dedicated to Pitṛs.’ In this manner the eulogy also becomes consistent.
The ‘receptacles’ dedicated to Brahmā and the rest being directly
enjoined as those to be used, people might be led into the mistake that
in the absence of these the other may be used; hence with a view to
prevent this it was only right to mention the *Pitrya-tīrtha* also (as
that which should never be used).—(58)


