+++
title = "059 अङ्गुष्ठमूलस्य तले"

+++
The ‘root’ of the thumb is its lower part; and the part, of the hand
just below that root is the ‘receptacle dedicated to Brahmā.’—The term
‘*tala*’ stands for the inner part (the palm). That inner portion of the
hand which extends up to the long palm-line and faces one’s own eyes is
the part ‘dedicated to Brahmā.’

That at the root of the fingers, above the horizontal palmline is
‘dedicated to Prajāpati.’

‘*That on the tip of the fingers is dedicated to the Gods*’—Even though
the term ‘*aṅguli*’ forms the subordinate factor in the compound
(‘*aṅguli-mule*’), yet it is construed with the term ‘*agre*,’ for the
simple reason that this latter is a relative term (and hence stands in
need of a correlative).

‘*That below these two is dedicated to the Pitṛs*.’—This also is to be
construed with the terms ‘*aṅguli*’ and ‘*aṅguṣṭha*,’ though both of
these form subordinate factors in the two compounds. The ‘finger’ meant
here is the index-finger. Hence it is the part below the thumb and the
index-finger which is ‘dedicated to the Pitṛs.’

We interpret the text in this manner on the strength of what is
prescribed in other Smṛtis, and also upon that of the practices of
cultured people; specially as no sense could be got out of the words as
they stand. Says Śaṅkha—‘Below the thumb and behind the first palm-line
is the receptacle dedicated to Brahmā; that between the thumb and the
index-finger is dedicated to the Pitṛs; that below the little finger is
dedicated to Prajāpati, that at the tip of the fingers is dedicated to
the Gods.’—(59)


