+++
title = "060 त्रिर् आचामेद्"

+++
Through any one of the aforesaid ‘receptacles’ he should three times
‘*sip water*,’—*i.e*., he should let water enter his stomach through the
mouth.

‘*Then*’—*i.e*., after the sipping of water,—he should ‘*twice*’—*i.e*.,
by repeating the act—‘*wipe the mouth,’—i.e*., the two lips. This
‘*wiping*’ consists of removing with a wet hand the drops of water
attaching to the lips.

*Question*.—“Whence do you get the idea that this wiping is to be done
*with the hand?*”

*Answer*.—We learn this from actual usage, and also deduce it from the
fact of the context dealing with ‘receptacles’ (which have been
described as parts of the band);—the terms ‘through the receptacle’ and
‘with vrater,’ though occurring elsewhere, being brought in here also.

Further, inasmuch as the *wiping* is meant only to serve a visible
purpose, the term ‘mouth’ is taken to stand for a part of the mouth
(*i.e*., the lips).

‘*Cavities*’—holes;—‘*he should touch with water*’—hold in the hand.
‘*Upasparśana*’ (of the text) is the same as ‘*sparśana*.’ Since the
text has been speaking of the ‘*mouth*,’ the ‘cavities’ meant to be
touched are those pertaining to the mouth (*i.e*., located in the bead).
Says Gautama (1.36)—‘He should touch the cavities *in the head*.’

‘*The Soul*’—stands for the Heart and the Navel. In the Upaniṣads we
read that ‘one should And the Soul in the heart.’ Hence the ‘touching of
the heart’ becomes the ‘touching of the Soul,’ the all-pervading entity
ensouling the body. (We have to take it in this sense, because) there
can be no *touching* of the Soul itself, which is something incorporeal.
In some law-books it is laid down that ‘one should touch the navel’;
hence we have included ‘navel’ also (as indicated by the term ‘Soul’ of
the text).

‘*Head*’—this is well known.

Since all *Smṛtis* arc meant to serve the same purpose, ‘the washing of
hands up to the wrists’ and such other acts (as are laid down in Gauṭama
1.36, for instance) also hare to be done along with those mentioned in
the text; such acts, for instance, as *not making noise*, *keeping
silent, sprinkling of water on the feet*,—or even *washing* the feet, as
laid down in the *Mahābhārata*.—(60)


