+++
title = "061 अनुष्णाभिर् अफेनाभिर्"

+++
‘*Hot*’ hero stands for boiled; elsewhere we read that the sipping
should be done ‘with unboiled water.’ So that the prohibition docs not
apply to such water as is naturally hot, or has imbibed the beat of the
hot atmosphere.

‘*Froth*’ is meant to include ‘bubbles’ also, as elsewhere we read that
‘the water should be free from froth and bubbles.’

The terms ‘*through* *the proper receptacle*’ and ‘*one who knows his
duties*’ have been added only for the purpose of filling up the metre.

‘*Desiring cleanliness*’—seeking to attain cleanliness, *i.e*., purity.
The sense is that without the sipping of water he can never be clean.

‘*Always*’—*i.e*., not only at the timo of eating, as would seem implied
by the fact of the rule occurring in the section on ‘eating,’—but also
at other times, when, for instance, one seeks cleanliness after passing
urine or stool, etc.

Though ‘water’ is the object of the act of *sipping*, yet it is put in
the Instrumental Case, with a view to indicate that what is prescribed
is meant to be applicable not only to the water that is sipped but also
to that which forms the instrument in such acts as the washing of the
feet and the like. What we hold is that in the act of *sipping* also the
water is only the ‘instrument’; specially as the *sipping* does not
constitute the sanctification of the water (in which case alone the
water could be the ‘object’).

‘*In solitude*’—*i.e*., in a clean place; a solitary place, being
uncrowded by people, is generally clean.

‘*With his face towards the North or the East*’;—the term ‘face’ is to
be construed along with each of the two terms (‘East’ and ‘North’); as
Gauṭama (1.35) says that ‘the man should face either the North or the
East.’ The compound should be expounded as ‘he who has his face towards
the North, East’; the compound being a pure *Bahuvrīhi*, not a Bahuvrīhi
containing another copulative compound *\[i.e*., we cannot expound the
compound as ‘North *and* East,’ and then compound this with the term
‘*mukha*,’ the sense in this case being ‘one having his face towards the
*North and the East*’\]. If wo made tho Bahuvrīhi contain a copulative
compound, then if the compound ‘*prāṅudak*’ were taken as an aggregative
copulative, it should have an additional ‘*a*’ at the end; nor could it
be taken as a segregative copulative. Further, it is not possible for
the man to face both the North and the East at one and the same time;
for in that case, the rule would mean that one part of the *sipping*
should be done with face towards the North, and another part of it with
face towards the East; and this would mean that the sipping is not done
at one place. Then again, the directions mentioned do not form the
principal factor in the predicate of the sentence, which alone could
justify their being taken reciprocally; nor does the term ‘*prāṅudak*’
from a well-known name of the North-East quarter, in the manner in which
‘*dakṣina-* *pūrva*’ does of the South-East quarter; hence there can be
no justification for the compound being taken as a containing another
compound name of a particular quarter, *\[i.e*., we cannot take
‘*prāṅudak*’ as the name of the North-East quarter and then compound it
with ‘*mukha*’\]. For these reasons the. compound cannot be taken as a
‘*Bahuvrīhi*’ containing within itself another compound. From all this
it follows that *option*, is meant; as is clearly laid down in another
*Smṛti*—‘Acts of cleanliness should be begun with

face towards the North *or* the East’ (*Gauṭama* 1.35). This option is
just like the option that we have in the case of the Sāman to be sung at
the *Ṣaḍoha* sacrifice, where the injunction being in the form that ‘the
*Bṛhadrathantara* Sāman should be sung,’ what is actually done is that
on some days of the sacrifice (which lasts for six days) they sing the
‘*Bṛhat*’ while on other the ‘*Rathantara*’ *Sāman*; and never on any
one day do they ever sing both the *Sāmans*.—(61)

The ‘sipping,’ as consisting of the drinking of water, has been
prescribed; but the exact quantity of the water to be sipped has not yet
been laid down. Hence the Text now proceeds to define the precise
measure (of the water to be sipped):—


