+++
title = "062 हृद्गाभिः पूयते"

+++
‘*Reaching the heart*’—that which reaches down to the regions of the
heart; the word being derived from the root ‘*gam*’ with the ‘ḍa’ affix,
according to Pāṇini, 6. 2.101; the term ‘*hṛdaya*’ being changed into
‘*hṛd*’ according to Pāṇini’s Sūtra, 6.3.50.

‘*Is purified*’—Reaches sanctity; that is, gets rid of impurity. The
water (reaching the heart) would, in quantity, be just a little less
than a handful.

‘*The Kṣatriya by that reaching the throat*’—*i.e*., by that which
reaches only down to the throat. The term ‘*bhūmipaḥ*’ in the text
stands for the Kṣatriya; as the ‘lordship of land’ is laid down for the
Kṣatriya only; and hence this well-known function (of ruling the land)
indicates here the *Kṣatriya* caste. If actual ‘lordship’ of the land
were meant, then what is laid down here would have been prescribed among
the ‘duties of tho king.’

‘*The Vaiśya by the water that is just sipped*,’—*i.e*., which is just
taken into the mouth; even without reaching the throat, the water thus
sipped serves to purify the Vaiśya.

‘*The Śūdra by what is touched with the end*;’—‘*anṭataḥ*’ stands for
‘*antena*’; the ‘*tasil*’ affix having the force of the instrumental,
according to the *Vārtika* on Pāṇini, 5. 4. 44. The term ‘*end*’
(*anta*) means proximity; *e.g*., the phrase ‘*udakānta*’ means ‘*near*
water’. It also means *a part*; *e.g*., in such expressions as
‘*vastrānta*,’ ‘*vasanānta*’ and the like. With both these
significations the term ‘end’ (being a relative term) stands in need of
a correlative; whenever it is used, one always wants to know—‘*near*
*what* ’ or ‘*part of what*.’ Now in the present case, the water-sipping
has been laid down for the other castes as to he done with certain parts
of the hand and the lips and the tongue; and it is the ‘end’ of these
that is meant. It cannot mean mere ‘*proxi* *mity*’; because the
‘*water-sipping*’ prescribed cannot he accomplished by mere proximity.
Then again, the ‘touch’ (of the water with the tongue and lips) would
involve *sipping* (which has been laid down for the Vaiśya); for one is
sure to feel the taste of that which is touched with the tongue and
lips. Hence the conclusion appears to he that the quantity of water
sufficient for the *Śūdra* is just a little less in quantity than that
for the *Vaiśya*; *e.g*., while for the Vaiśya the water should touch
the root of the tongue, for the Śūdra it should touch only its tip.

Water being a fluid substance, its going beyond the limits prescribed
would be unavoidable; hence all that is meant is that if the water
sipped fails to reach the prescribed limits, it fails to purify the man.

The description of the ‘receptacles’ (parts of the hand) refers to the
right hand; as it is this hand that should be used in all washings;
specially as it has been laid down that men should perform (religious)
acts with the right hand. It is for this reason that we reiterate this
fact in the present connection.—(62)


