+++
title = "063 उद्धृते दक्षिणे"

+++
An *objection* is raised—“As a matter of fact, in treatises dealing with
*Dharma*, the meanings of words are accepted to be exactly as they are
known in ordinary usage; and the works of Manu and others should not
make it their business to explain the meanings of words, in the way in
which it is done by grammatical and lexicographical works.”

*Ānswer*.—We have already answered this before; if treatises on Dharma
should be found to supply the explanation of such words as are not
ordinarily known, are they to be blamed for doing so? Then again, in the
present instance, there is another purpose also in view. The term
‘*upavītin*’ is explained in the course of the explanation of the act of
‘water-sipping,’ with a view to indicate that the method (of wearing the
sacred thread, etc.) is auxiliary to that act. Though it is true that
the wearing of the sacred thread,—either as part of a religious
observance, or as accomplishing certain desirable results for man,—is
known as to be done at all times, yet if the ‘water-sipping’ were done
without it, it would remain incomplete. So that, if we did not have the
present text (as indicating the necessity of wearing the sacred thread
during water-sipping), there would be some deficiency in the religious
act, as also some defect in the agent. If the sipping were done without
the sacred thread, it would be as good as not done, and there would be
the additional wrong done, in the shape of sipping the water while
unclean.

*Question*.—“How is it that the *Upavīta-method* alone is regarded as
auxiliary to the ‘water-sipping,’ when as a matter of fact, the present
text has spoken of another method, the ‘*Prāchīnāvīta*,’ also?”

Our answer is as follows:—As for the ‘*Prāchīnāvīta*’ method, this has
been directly prescribed, in so many words, as pertaining to acts of
offering to the *Pitṛs*; so that when its use has been found in
connection with these, it could not be taken as an alternative to the
‘*Upavīta*’ method, whose use has not yet been found. Similarly the
‘*Nivīṭa*’ method also has its use in connection with acts of sorcery.
Though the use of the ‘*Nivīṭa*’ has not been laid down in the itself,
yet since all *Smṛtis* have the same end in view, the use prescribed in
other *Smṛtis* could be regarded as accepted in the present context
also.

The term ‘*hand*’ stands here for the *arm*; it is only when the man
raises his *arm* that he is called ‘*Upavīṭi*’; further, we are going to
point out later on that the ‘*Upavīṭa*’ is the method (of wearing the
thread) to be employed at all times (not during religious acts only);
and no one is called ‘*Upavīṭin*’ by merely lifting his *hand*.

‘*When the left hand is held above*,’ he is called ‘*Prāchīnāvīṭī*’; it
is the compounded form (‘*prāchīnāvīṭī*’) that constitutes the name; the
text puts it iu the uncompounded form on account of the exigencies of
metre.

‘*On its hanging by the neck*’;—‘*Sajjana*,’ ‘*hanging*’ means *being
worn*, when the sacred thread, or the piece of cloth, is worn over the
neck, and neither arm is held over it, then the man becomes
‘*nivītī*.’—(63)


