+++
title = "064 मेखलाम् अजिनम्"

+++
The present verse enjoins that when these things are damaged, they
should be thrown into water and others should be taken up; and the
sequence of the ‘throwing’ and the ‘taking up’ is to be just as it is
found in the text. In as much as one has got to take up these things
again, they cannot be regarded as forming part of the Initiatory
Ceremony itself; if it were part of this ceremony, then all their
purpose would have been fulfilled by the completion of the ceremony. The
right view therefore is that these should continue to be taken up
throughout the ‘student-stage.’

“But is it not possible to regard the *throwing into water* here laid
down as the *disposal* of the things mentioned, if they happen, during
the Initiatory Ceremony—and before its completion,—to be damaged by
divine or human adverse forces? The taking up of fresh ones, would, in
this case, be necessary for the completion of the ceremony; just as
there is of the begging-bowl. Is it absolutely impossible for the text
to be taken in this manner, that the mere fact of the *re-taking* being
laid down should be made the basis of assuming that the things should
continue to be held throughout the student-stage?”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—As for mere ‘*holding*,’ this has
been laid down in connection with the *staff* only (during the
Initiatory Rite); as for the *girdle* what is to be done during the
ceremony is only its *tying* (round the waist); so that what should be
done as part of the Initiatory Ceremony is the peculiar *arrangement of
strings* (which constitutes the act of *tying*); this being done, the
purpose of the Injunction will have been fulfilled; so that if, at some
future time, any thing becomes damaged or not, what effect could that
have upon the ceremony (which will have been long completed)? As for the
particular form of ‘disposal,’ this helps the Rite only when what has
become damaged forms an integral part of the Rite itself. Nor again have
the scriptures laid down any purpose for which the girdle, etc., are
worn, for the fulfilment of which purpose, the re-taking of them (during
the ceremony) would be enjoined (in the present text); it is only when
the purpose of a certain object has not been fulfilled, that we take it
for granted that that object should be taken up again. For these
reasons, because the text lays down (*a*) a particular form of
*Disposal*, and (*b*) the re-taking of the things, we conclude that,
even though the holding of these may form an integral part of the
Initiatory Ceremony, the necessity of this *holding* does not end with
the completion of the ceremony. Then again, the girdle, etc., are
mentioned in the same category as the ‘water-pot,’ which continues to be
held *after* the ceremony also; and this shows that the other articles
also are to continue to be held, and all this ‘holding’ forms part of
the *observances* (of the Religious Student). From all this it follows
that the girdle and other things are subservient to both: by the force
of ‘context,’ they form part of the Initiatory Ceremony, and since they
are found to be held after the completion of that ceremony, they are to
continue as long as the ‘student-stage’ lasts. That the ‘water-pot’ has
to be carried (always) for the purpose of carrying water is also implied
by (the binding and universal character of) the injunction of the
‘Disposal’; otherwise (if the *pot* were not meant to be carried
*always*), the meaning of the injunction would be that the *disposal* is
to be carried out only when the water-pot may be held; and this would
make the Injunction partial and limited in its application.

As regards the ‘holding of the staff,’ this comes to be regarded as part
of the ‘begging of food,’ on the basis of sequence enjoined in the rule
‘one should beg for food *after taking up the staff*’, but on the basis
of actual practice, it comes to be done in connection with such ordinary
*talking* also as is not done for the purpose of ‘food-begging.’ But it
does not mean that the staff should be held *always*; for the boy who
may be holding the stick would be unable to do such acts as standing,
sitting, sleeping, eating and so forth; similarly in Verse 2.70 it is
laid down that the boy, when proceeding to read the Veda, should sit
with joined palms (and this would not be possible if he held the staff
in his hand).

‘*With the proper formulas*’—this means that the retaking of the
articles should be in the same manner in which they are taken up during
the Initiatory Ceremony; and in that connection formulas are laid down
in regard to the wearing of the Girdle, and not in regard to the holding
of the staff.—(64)


