+++
title = "067 वैवाहिको विधिः"

+++
The ceremony called ‘*Upanaya*,’ ‘Initiation,’ has been called ‘Vedic,’
because it is gone through for the purpose of studying the Veda. This
ceremony, in the case of females, consists of the ‘Rites of
marriage,’—*i.e*., those rites that are accomplished by means of
marriage. Thus, since ‘marriage’ has been prescribed for them in place
of the ‘Initiation,’ the former has been described here as becoming the
latter; and this can preclude the necessity of ‘Initiation’ only if the
purposes of this latter were taken as served by the ‘marriage.’

*Objection*.—“Well, the Initiation may be excluded from women, but the
study of the Veda and the keeping of the observances have still got to
be performed.”

With a view to preclude these two also, the Text adds—

‘*The serving of husband is their residence with the Teacher*.’ When the
woman *serves*—attends upon and reveres her husband, she does what is
meant to bo accomplished by ‘Residence with the Teacher.’ The study of
the Veda could be done by the woman only if she resided with the
Teacher; and as there is no ‘Residence with the Teacher’ in her case,
how can there be any studying of the Veda? ‘*Household duties*’;—all
that she does in the course of her household work,—*e.g*., cooking,
getting together of articles for household use, general supervision, and
so forth, which are going to be described in discourse IX, ‘the husband
should employ her in saving wealth &c., &c.’ (9.11). These household
duties are for the woman what the ‘bringing of fuel’ in the morning and
evening is for the Religious Student (male). The term ‘*tending of*
*fire*’ stands for all the observances and vows that the student keeps.

By reason of the ‘Marriage’ having taken the place of the ‘Initiatory
Ceremony’ (for women), it follows that, just as in the case of men, all
the ordinances of Śruti and Smṛti and custom become binding upon him
after the Initiatory Ceremony, before which they are free to do what
they like, and are unfit for any religious duties,—so for women, there
is freedom of action before Marriage, after which they become subject to
the ordinances of Śrutis and Smṛtis.

Or, we may interpret the text as follows:—Marriage constitutes the Vedic
Sacrament—*i.e*., TJpanayana—for females; even though marriage is not
really the Upanayana, yet it is spoken of as such attributively. The
question arising as to whence lies the similarity by virtue of which
Marriage is spoken of as Upanayana, the text adds—‘*the serving of the
husband* &c., &c.’—(67)

The next verse sums up the contents of the section—


