+++
title = "069 उपनीय गुरुः"

+++
‘*Should teach*’—should make him learn.

‘*First of all*’;—this does not mean that Cleanliness should be taught
before Right Behaviour and the rest; in fact, there is no order of
sequence intended among those mentioned here; all that the text is going
to lay down is that after the Initiation there should he the teaching of
the observances; and after the pupil has been instructed regarding the
observances, he should proceed with the study of the Veda. Hence if the
text meant that the boy should be taught Fire-kindling and the
Twilight-Devotions before being taught the observances, it would be
laying down for him the reciting of mantras not prescribed anywhere
else,—because each of the two acts mentioned is performed with mantras.
As for ‘cleanliness,’ there can be no fixed time for it; and it must be
taught on the very day on which the boy has been initiated. So also
‘Right Behaviour.’ For these reasons it is clear that the phrase ‘first
of all’ is meant to denote *importance*, and it does not mean that it is
to be taught before everything else.

‘*Cleanliness*’—stands for all those acts that begin with the washing of
the private parts, once, &c., &c. (5. 136) and ending with the *sipping
of water*.

‘*Right Behaviour*’—rising to receive the Teacher and other superiors,
offering them seat and saluting them.

‘*Fire-tending*’—the kindling of fire, and supplying of fuel.

The *devotion* offered at *twiligh*, to the Sun, consists in meditating
upon the form of the Sun. This is what is meant by the
‘*Twilight-Devotions*.’ Or, it may refer to what is going to be
prescribed below, in verse 101.

This is what constitutes the ‘Duty relating to Observances.’—(69)


