+++
title = "070 अध्येष्यमाणस् त्व्"

+++
The Future ending (in ‘*adhyīṣyamāṇaḥ*’) denotes the immediate future;
and means ‘when engaging in study,’ ‘when beginning to study,’ ‘when
desiring to proceed with his study.’

‘*He* *shall be* *taught*, *with hist face* *to* *the north*.’—Gautama
(1.65) has laid down that ‘the pupil should face the east, while the
Teacher faces the west.’

‘*When he has sipped water according to law*’—refers to the rules
prescribed above regarding the sipping of water.

The compound ‘*brahmāñjalikṛtaḥ*’ is to be expounded as ‘he by whom
Brahmāñjali has been formed.’ the past participal adjective
(‘*kṛtaḥ*’)being placed at the end, according to Pāṇini 2.2.37;—the
present compound being analogous to such compounds as ‘*āhitāgni*’ and
the like. Or, we may read ‘*brahmāñjalikṛt*.’

‘*Wears light clothing*’;—*i.e*., with clothes thoroughly washed; a
thorough washing always makes the cloth ‘light’; hence ‘lightness’
indicates *cleanliness*. Or, ‘light clothing’ may be taken in its
literal sense, the lightness of the clothing being meant to serve a
visible purpose: if the boy were

Heavily clad in thick woolen clothes, he would not feel the strokes of
the rope with which he would be struck when found to be inattentive, and
not feeling the stroke, he would not study in the proper manner; and if
the teacher, on this account, found it necessary to remove the cloth
from the back (each time that the rope would be laid on the back), this
would tire the teacher himself; and further, if the boy were struck with
the rope on the naked body, he, would feel great pain.

‘*One who has his organs under full control*’;—*i.e*., one who has fully
subdued all bis organs, both external and internal. The sense is that he
should not turn his eyes this way and that, should not listen to
anything and everything that may be talked of, he should devote all his
attention to his own study.—(70)


