+++
title = "071 ब्रह्मारम्भे ऽवसाने"

+++
Though the term ‘*brahma*’ has many meanings, yet, in view of the fact
of the present context bearing on ‘study,’ it is taken here as standing
for the *Veda*.

‘*At the beginning of the Veda*’;—the Locative ending denotes
*occasion*; and since the context bears upon ‘study,’ the beginning
meant is that of the action of *study*; and the ‘*beginning*’ stands for
the very *first recitation* by the person concerned. And it is at this
first recitation that the Teacher’s feet are to be clasped. The term
‘beginning’ here cannot stand for the first letters of the
Vedas—‘*agnimīle*’ (Ṛgveda), ‘*ikhe tvorje*’ (Yajurveda), ‘*agna āyāhi*’
(Sāmaveda); because these opening words could never form the *occasion*
(for the clasping of the feet); for the simple reason that (being parts
of the eternal Veda) they are ever present; while it is only what is
itself occasional (occurring only at certain times) that can be the
*occasion* for anything. Hence what is meant is that—‘when one is going
to begin the study of the Veda, he should clasp the Teacher’s feet, and
having done that he should recite the words of the Veda and it does not
mean that he should clasp the Teacher’s feet every time that he may
study the Veda.

“The first moment of the act is what is called its ‘beginning’; and it
is this *beginning* that is spoken of as the *occasion*. Now it is only
what is *existent* that can form the occasion for anything; *e.g*., when
*living existence* is regarded as the occasion for the performance of
*Agnihotra*, it is the *existence* that is *present*. It is true that in
some cases, the burning of the house and such other *past* events also
are spoken of as the occasion for certain acts; but in these cases we
accept them as such because that is what is actually prescribed. In the
present instance however, the ‘beginning of study’ and ‘clasping of the
feet’ should be regarded as simultaneous.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—What is called ‘beginning’ here
is the *making up of one’s mind to study*, and not the *first moment* of
the act. The Boy makes up his mind to study as soon as the Teacher
addresses to him the words ‘now read’; so that it is after this that the
feet are to be clasped. This is intended to be the propitiation of the
Teacher who is going to bestow a favour. Just as in the ordinary world,
when a person is going to bestow a favour upon another, the latte?
welcomes him with the words—‘it is through you that I have been saved
from this sin.’

This clasping of the feet is meant to embody the speechless request—‘we
are ready to proceed with our study’; for the Teacher is never to be
directed with the words ‘now teach us.’ All that is to be done is that
the Boy should approach him (and clasp his feet), with a view to remind
him that it is time for study, and it is only after this approaching has
been done, that the words of the Veda should begin to he recited.

Further, in view of the rule that ‘one should study the Veda with joined
palms,’ if the boy were to study (with joined palms), he would he
transgressing the rule regarding the *damping of feet* (if the *study*
and the were meant to he simultaneous) \[for one who would have his
hands joined could not clasp the feet\].

‘*find*’—Ceasing, desisting from study.

Though the term ‘*brahma*’ is the subordinate factor in the compound
(‘*brahmārambhe*’) yet, in as much as the term ‘end’ is a relative term,
it is taken as correlated to the term ‘*brahma*’; specially because
there is no other word in the text with which it could be connected.

‘*Always*’—implies that this rule regarding the clasping of feet should
he observed at the beginning and end of all future study, *every day*.
If this word were not present, the rule would be taken as applying to
only that ‘beginning of study’ which comes immediately after the
Initiatory Ceremony; on the analogy of the *Ārambhaṇīyā Iṣṭi*, which is
performed only at the beginning of the first sacrifice performed by the
*Agnihotrin*, after he has done the ‘Fire-kindling,’ and *not* at that
of each succeeding *pūrnamāsa*, which is performed every month.

From morning till such time as the daily routine of reciting two
Chapters has not been finished, the whole is regarded as a single act of
‘study’; so that if at intervals, there is some obstruction, the
resuming of study on the same day is not regarded as ‘beginning’; and at
each resumption, the feet are not clasped. In another *Smṛti* we
read—‘The clasping of the Teacher’s feet should be done every day in the
morning.’ Gautama, 2.53).

‘*Having joined*’—making them touch one another.

‘*Should be studied*’;—what is meant is that the hands should he placed
in that posture which resembles the tortoise.

‘*This is Brahmāñjali*’;—this explains the meaning of the term
‘*brahmāñjali*’—(71)


