+++
title = "073 अध्येष्यमाणन् तु"

+++
‘*When going to study*’ and the other expressions have already been
explained before. The present verse adds a direction for the Teacher.
When a boy is desirous to read the Veda from a Teacher, he should be
invited with the words ‘ho, read!’ Until he is so invited, the Boy
should not press the Teacher with such importunate requests as—‘please
teach us this chapter!’ Another *Smṛti* has declared—‘One should study
on being invited to do so’. (Yājñavalkya, Ācāra, 27).

Saying the words ‘*let there be a stop*,’ ‘*he should
cease*’—desist,—‘who is to cease?’—The Teacher; as is clear from the
nominative case-ending used. Or, it may be taken to mean that the
*pupil* should cease only when dismissed by the Teacher, and not
according to his own wish; the construction of the passage in this case
being—‘when the Teacher says *let there be a stop*, then the pupil
*should cease*.’

Other people have explained this rule regarding the time of ceasing as
applying to all readers—the pupil as well as the Teacher. And this is in
accordance with another *Smṛti*, which says—“Having recited the Veda, at
the time of ceasing, one should touch the ground with the fore-finger
and pronounce ‘*svasti*’ in the case of the Yajurveda, ‘*vispaṣṭām*’ in
the case of the Sāman, ‘*virāmaḥ*’ in the case of the Ṛgveda and
‘*āramasva*’ in the case of the Atharva.”

‘*Free from indolence*’—without sloth; ‘indolence’ is *sloth*;—the man
beset with sloth is called ‘indolent’; and when he has given it up he is
called ‘*from indolence*.’ This is meant to be merely descriptive.
‘Indolence’ here does not mean *fatigue*. The present text should never
be taken to mean that what is here laid down is for only one who is free
from indolence, while for those beset with indolence there is some other
rule.—(73)


