+++
title = "074 ब्रह्मणः प्रणवम्"

+++
Here also, in accordance with what has gone before (under 71), ‘*one
should pronounce the Praṇava in the beginning and at the end of the
Veda*’;—which means that the syllable is to be pronounced in the
beginning and at the end of the action of reading the Veda.

The term ‘*praṇava*’ stands for the syllabic ‘*oṃ*’; as is clear from
what the text adds later on—‘not accompanied *by the syllable oṃ*.’

‘*Always*’—has been added in order to show that the rule applies to
every act of study. Without this term it would appear, from the context,
that it applies to only that *first* study by the Religious Student
which is done for the getting up of the text. When the adverb ‘always’
has been added, it becomes clear that the rule applies to all forms of
studying,—that which is done for the purpose of keeping the memory of
the text fresh, or that which is done by the Householder and other
people in obedience to the injunction that ‘the Veda should be studied
every day.’ As regards the reciting of Vedic mantras during the Twilight
Prayer, etc., the use of the syllable ‘oṃ’ the author is going to enjoin
directly (in Verse 78). What is laid down here is not meant to be a
necessary accompaniment of the Veda,—which would mean that the rule is
to be followed whenever one pronounces any Vedic passage; thus it is
that the Praṇava is not used with Vedic mantras on the following
occasions: at oblations poured into fire, or during the *japa* of
mantras, or in course of the teaching of scriptures, or at the
recitation of the ‘*Yājyā*’ and other hymns, or when Vedic passages are
quoted only by way of illustration. From all this it follows that the
adverb ‘*always*’ is meant to show only that the rule laid down applies
to that study of the Veda which forms the subject-matter of the context.
As for the necessity of using the *Praṇava* at the beginning of one’s
daily study, this is secured by the construing of the term ‘always’ of
the preceding verse with the present one.

In praise of what has been enjoined the text adds—‘*If it is not
accompanied by the syllable oṁ*, etc.’ If, in the beginning, the Veda is
not accompanied by the syllable ‘oṃ,’ *it trickles off*. The compound
‘*anoṅkṛtam*’ is to be expounded as ‘that which is not
*accompanied*,—*i.e*., sanctified—by the syllable *oṃ*’ according to
Pāṇini, 2. 1. 32; or, it may be expounded as ‘that Veda in which the
syllable *oṁ* is not uttered,’—the order of the terms in this case being
in accordance with the rule laid down in connection with the ‘*Sukhādi*’
group, according to Pāṇini, 6. 2. 170.

‘*At the end*’—at the close. The particle ‘and’ indicates that the term
‘not accompanied by the syllable *om*’ is to be construed here also.

‘*Trickles off-—becomes shattered*.’—Both these terms are meant to
indicate the futility of the study. The sense being that that religious
act, in which the Veda studied in the said defective fashion is used,
absolutely fails to accomplish its purpose. This is an *Arthavāda* meant
to be deprecatory of the said method of study. When milk is placed in a
pot, the milks passes off all round; and this is what is called
‘*trickling off*’; and if the milk becomes destroyed after it has been
boiled and become solidified, this is what is called ‘*becoming
shattered*.’—(74)


