+++
title = "075 प्राक्-कूलान् पर्युपासीनः"

+++
The term ‘*kūṭa*’ means ‘kuśa-blade’;—‘*Seated upon*’ them,—*i.e*.,
seated upon kuśa-blades pointing eastwards. The accusative ending in
‘*kūṭān*’ being in accordance with Pāniṇi 1. 4. 46, ‘*adhisthīnsthāsām
karma*,’ where the latter part consists of the factors
‘*athā*’—‘*ā*’—‘*āsām*.’ In the word ‘*paryupāsīnaḥ*’ also we have an
‘*ā*’, the word containing the factors
‘*pari*’—‘*upa*’—‘*ā*’—‘*āsīnaḥ*’; the prefixes ‘*pari*’ and ‘*upa*’
having no significance at all.

‘*Sanctified by kuśa-blades*’;—*i.e*., having been made pure. The term
‘*pavitra*’ cannot stand for the *Aghamarṣaṇa* and other mantras; for
the simple reason that at the time that the text is being dealt with,
the student has not read those *mantras*. Nor are kuśa-blades capable,
by their mere presence, to bring about purification for one who does no
(purificatory) act; thus then, the necessity of some intervening act
being essential, we are led to conclude, on the basis of another
*Smṛti*, that this act is in the form of *touching the sense-organs*;
Gautama (1.48-50) having prescribed ‘the touching of the organs with
Kuśa-blades and seating upon Kuśa-blades pointing eastwards.’

‘*Purified by means of three Breath-suspensions*’—The air passing
through the mouth and the nostrils is called ‘*prāṇa*,’ ‘breath’; and
the ‘*āyāma*’ of this is its *suspension, holding within the body,
preventing its going out*. Another *Smṛti* (Yājñavalkya, *Ācāra*, 23)
has laid down the measure of the time during which the breath is to be
suspended—as also the mantra accompanying it,—“One, witholding his
breath, should mutter three times the *Gāyatrī* along with the *Praṇava*
and the *Śiras*,—this is what is called ‘Breath-suspension’.” The
revered Vaśiṣṭha has added to these the *Great Vyāhṛtis* also. It is the
end of the mantra that should mark the end of the *suspension*, no other
limit for it being prescribed. In as much as all Smṛtis are meant to
serve the same purpose, we must accept this same method of
‘Breath-suspension’ to be meant by the present text also, specially as
there is no inconsistency with it.

*Objection*.—“What has been said here involves a mutual interdependence:
until the Breath-suspensions have been performed one should not
pronounce ‘Oṃ,’ while without this syllable ‘Oṃ’ there can be no
‘Breath-suspension’.”

There is nothing wrong in this. When Yājñavalkya lays down that ‘one
should mutter three times; etc.,’ all that is meant is the mental act of
*remembering, thinking of*, the syllable ‘*Oṃ*’; for when the breath is
suspended, there can be no *utterance* of any syllable; though it is
true that ‘*Japa*,’ ‘Reciting,’ is (in most cases) something that can be
accomplished only by an operation of speech. In connection with the
reading of the Veda however, what is intended is actual *utterance* of
the syllable; and this for the simple reason that the act of reading
consists of actual utterance—the root (in ‘*adhyayana*’) signify ing the
*waking of sound*, and *sound* is that which is heard by the *Ear*, and
not that which is cognised only by the mind.

What is prescribed here is not something applicable to the syllable ‘Oṃ’
itself,—whereby it could be made applicable to the uttering of the
syllable on other occasions also. It has been said that the syllable
should be pronounced at the beginning of Vedic study; but if the. rule
here laid down were meant to be applicable to all utterances of the
syllable, it would have to be observed in connection with such
utterances of it in ordinary parlance as when one says ‘we say *yes*
(oṃ).’

Then again, Gautama (l.49) has declared that. ‘the three
Breath-suspensions extend over fifteen moments.’ The term ‘*mātrā*,’
‘moment,’ stands for that point of time which is taken up in the
pronouncing of a simple unmodified vowel; and in as much as this cannot
be consistent with the time-limit prescribed by Yājñavalkya, this latter
cannot be accepted as applicable to what is prescribed by Gautama; in
which connection again no mantras are laid down. From this it is clear
that there can be ‘Breath-suspensions’ even without the uttering of the
syllable ‘oṃ.’ And thus there need be no mutual interdependence.

Then alone does the man ‘*become entitled to the syllable oṃ*’;—*i.e*.,
to the ‘pronouncing’ of the syllable,—the word ‘pronouncing’ having to
be supplied if the entire term ‘*oṅkāra*’ is taken as standing for the
*Praṇava*. If however we take the term ‘*kār*’ separately in the sense
of *making*,—so that ‘*oṁkāra*’ means the *making* or *uttering* of the
syllable ‘oṃ,’—then we do not need to supply any other word. The
uttering of the syllable having been laid down (under 74), where it is
called ‘*praṇava*’;—the term ‘*oṅkāra*’ in the present sense simply
serves the purpose of explaining what that ‘*praṇava*’ is.

So that ‘*praṇava*’ and ‘*oṅkāra*’ are synonymous terms; as we have
already pointed out (in the Bhāṣya on 74).—(75)


