+++
title = "078 एतद् अक्षरम्"

+++
Though this verse is syntactically connected with the section dealing
with the Injunction of Vedic study, yet it is to be taken as embodying
the injunction of recitation during the Twilight-Prayers; and as regards
the ‘*Gāyatrī*’-verse itself, the mention of it (in the present verse)
is merely for the purposes of *reference* (the injunction of its
recitation having already gone before), while that of the *Praṇava* and
the *Vyāhṛtis* forms the direct injunction of the recitation of these,
which has not been enjoined anywhere else.

To this some people make the following objection:—

“This cannot be regarded as an Injunction pertaining to the Twilight
Prayers; as these do not form the subject-matter of the present context.
Even if it was an injunction, it could only be one pertaining to the
Religious Student; as it is the Student whose duties are being
propounded in the present context. But this is not possible, since the
text has added the qualification ‘*learned in the Veda*’; and certainly
the student just initiated could never be ‘learned in the Veda.’
Further, the text also adds a particular fruit—‘*becomes endowed with
Vedic merit*’; while the Injunction of the Twilight-Prayers is a
compulsory one. Then again, we do not understand what is this fruit,
called ‘Vedic merit’ which is described as proceeding from the
recitation. If what is meant is the merit proceeding from the recitation
of the Veda, and if the attaining of this merit is what is meant by
being ‘endowed with Vedic merit’—then, in regard to this view it has to
be noted that so far as the Injunction of Veda-reciting is
concerned—which forms the subject-matter of the present context,—there
can be no other result proceeding from it, except the understanding of
the meaning of tho Vedic texts; for the simple reason that no such
result has been anywhere mentioned. Further, in as much as there is a
perceptible result in the shape of the comprehension of meaning, there
can be no room for the assuming of any other results. The injunction of
Veda-reciting that there is for the Householder and others,—in the words
‘day after day one should recite the Veda’—this also is a compulsory
one; and the results mentioned in connection with it, in the shape of
‘milk, and honey, etc.,’ this is only a valedictory supplement. From all
this it is clear that the present verse cannot be regarded as an
Injunction (of recitation during the Twilight Prayers). Specially as, if
it were taken as an Injunction, all the above difficulties will have to
be explained. On the other band, if the verse be taken as a valedictory
reference, then the term ‘reciting’ could be taken as referring to the
Reciting of the Veda, which forms the subject-matter of the context; and
in that case it would be possible to construe the term ‘Vedic merit’
also in some way or the other.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—

It has been already explained that the implications of context are
always set aside by those of Syntactical Connection; and for the very
reason that the terms ‘learned in the Veda’ and ‘Twilight prayers’ are
not connected with the subject-matter of the context,—the present
Injunction is to be taken as pertaining to something else. The
Injunction is simply to the effect that during the two Twilight Prayers
one should pronounce the three expressions (*Om—Sāvitrī
verse*—*Vyāhṛtis*); and the term ‘learned in the Veda’ is merely
descriptive?

“But as a matter of fact, it is possible only for persons in the
Householder and other stages to be ‘learned in the Veda’; the Student
can never be so.

What has this *possibility* got to do with the matter? If the term is
taken as merely descriptive of what is already known from other sources,
then the injunction contained in the verse becomes applicable to people
in all stages of life. While if the term ‘learned in the Veda’ were
taken as a significant epithet of the Nominative agent (of the act
enjoined), then the student would not be entitled to the act.

“Why should the term be taken as merely descriptive?”

For the simple reason that there would (otherwise) be a syntactical
split. The injunction pertaining to the Injunction of the Twilight
Prayers, what has to be enjoined regarding it is the reciting of the
*Praṇava* and the *Vyāhṛtis*, which has not been enjoined anywhere else,
Now, if in addition to these, something else were taken as enjoined,—in
the form of ‘being learned in the Veda,’—then there would be a
syntactical split \[the sentence in question containing two injunctions,
(*a*) ‘should recite the Praṇava, etc.,’ and (*b*) ‘should learn the
Veda’\]; and it is not legitimate to enjoin (by means of a single
sentence) several details pertaining to an act already enjoined. Nor is
it possible (as another alternative) to take the mention of the
*Praṇava* and the *Vyāhṛtis* as merely descriptive \[because their
injunction has not been met with anywhere else\].

From all this it follows that what the Text means is as follows:—‘In
connection with the *reciting of the Gāyatrī* that has been enjoined in
relation to the Twilight Prayers, there is this further detail that the
said recitation is to lie preceded by the uttering of the *Praṇava* and
the *Vyāhṛtis*.’

The mention of the ‘*Brāhmaṇa'* is only by way of illustration.

It has been argued above that—“the text speaks of a result, while the
Injunction of the Twilight Prayers is a compulsory one.”

But what inconsistency is there in this? While what is enjoined is a
compulsory act, the result mentioned may follow from the further detail
mentioned in the text; the meaning being that ‘the said result follows
from the previously enjoined Twilight Prayer, when it is accompanied by
the recitation of the *Praṇava* and the *Vyāhṛtis*. Just as when the
ordinary Agnihotra is performed with the water brought over in the
milking vessel, there comes about the particular result in the shape of
cattle; and this in (?) accordance with the injunction that ‘for one
desiring cattle water should be brought in the milking vessel.’

It is on the strength of this last injunction that we have made bold to
say what we have said above. In reality the injunction contained in the
verse is not an optional one at all (meant only for those desiring the
particular result mentioned). Specially as another *Smṛti* (Yājñavalkya,
1. 23) clearly lays it down as a compulsory injunction—‘One should
recite the *Gāyatrī* along with the *Śiras*, preceded by the
*Vyāhṛtis*.’

Further, you have yourself argued that the exact nature of the result
(‘Vedic merit’) cannot be ascertained (which is an argument against the
text being taken as laying down a result). As a matter of fact, what
‘Vedic merit’ means is as follows:—‘The merit that has been described in
the Veda as resulting from the saying of the Twilight Prayers accrues to
man only when he recites all the three expressions—and not by reciting
the *Gāyatrī* only.’ ‘*Puṇya*,’ ‘*merit*,’ is *excellence*. Since
*Smṛtis* are based upon the *Veda*, what is mentioned in the *Smṛtis* is
also called ‘Veda-merit,’ which last expression stands for the ‘*merit
of the Veda*.’

“What is the merit of the Veda?”

That (merit) which is expounded by the Veda. The merit that results from
the Veda being recited may also be called ‘the merit of the Veda’; but
by virtue of the specific relationship, it is what is expounded by the
Veda,—and what is *produced* by it—that should be spoken of as ‘merit of
the Veda.’ As for the *producing* of merit, this is done by other things
also, such as sacrificial performances and the like; while the
*expounding* of it is done by the Veda only.

Some people have taken the last foot of the Verse to mean as
follows—“What has been enjoined as compulsory Vedic Study becomes
fulfilled merely by reciting the three expressions during the Twilight
Prayers.”

But this is not right. For if the present text meant this, then it would
be providing an option to what has been laid down as the compulsory
‘Vedic Study’; and this would mean the partial rejection of this study.
But so long as we can avoid it, it is not right to admit the rejection
of any injunction.

‘*This syllable*’—refers to the syllable ‘*oṃ*.’

“But this is not a single *letter*, containing as it does, two or three
syllables.”

Our answer is that the term ‘syllable’ here stands for ‘vowel-sound’ and
‘contact with consonants.’ Hence the term denotes that which forms the
subject-matter of the context.

‘*This Verse*’—*i.e*., the *Sāvitrī* verse ‘*tat saviturvareṇyam*, etc.’

‘*Preceded by the Vyāhṛtis*;’—*i.e*., that before which the *Vyāhṛtis*
have been uttered. Here only the *three Vyāhṛtis* are meant,—these alone
having been mentioned in the present context (in verse 76),—and not the
*seven*, ending with ‘*Satyam*.’


