+++
title = "079 सहस्रकृत्वस् त्व्"

+++
The term ‘*bahiḥ*,’ ‘in *open air*,’ stands for *uncovered spot*; the
sense being that it should be done outside towns and villages, on the
bank of rivers and such places.

‘*A thousand times, repeating*’—reciting it again and again.

“The affix ‘*kṛtvasuch*’ (in the term ‘*Sahasrakṛtvaḥ*’) also signifies
*repetition*, which is again denoted by the word ‘*abhyasya*’ also; so
there is needless repetition.”

The repetition is not objectionable, in view of a distinction between
general and particular. That is to say, the word ‘*abhyasya*’ denotes
repetition *in* *general*, and when the question arises as to the
*particular* number of repetitions, we have the text adding ‘*a thousand
times*.’ Both the general and the particular could not be regarded as
signified by the single word ending with the ‘*kṛtvasuch*’ affix;
because this latter word always stands in need of a particular act (that
has to be done a thousand times). The mere expression ‘*devadattaḥ*
*pan* *chakritvo’haḥ*,’ ‘Devadatta five times during the day’ does not
signify anything until the word ‘*bhuṅkte*,’ ‘*Eats*,’ is added.

“But the term ‘*repeating*’ also does not signify any particular *act*.”

True; but the act of *reciting* forms the subject-matter of the context;
so that the *repeating* is understood as pertaining to that act;
‘*repetition*’ standing for *attending to it again and again*.

‘*Even from great sin*’;—he becomes freed from even such heinous sins as
‘Brāhmaṇa-killing’ and the like; what to say of minor offences?

‘*Api*,’ ‘*Even*,’ denotes *possibility*, not *cumulation*; cumulation
is expressed when more things than one are mentioned separately; as in
the sentence—‘there is sovereignty of Devadatta, *and* of Yajñadatta
*also*.’ There is no such separate mention in the text.

*Question*—“From what minor offences does the man become freed?
*Cow-killing* and such acts have been regarded as ‘minor offences’; and
for every one of these the scriptures have prescribed distinct expiatory
rites along with all their details. While as regards those acts that are
not done consciously, but which are regarded as *must have been
done*,—though no definite expiation could be prescribed for them, yet
they would be got rid of by means of the Twilight Prayers and such other
compulsory rites prescribed for daily performance. Then again, if what
is mentioned in the present verse were a real expiation, it should have
come under the section on Expiatory Rites (Ch. XI); just as it is said
(under 11. 77)—‘One may recite the text of the Veda while keeping due
restraint over food.’ Further, if the present verse were meant to
prescribe an expiatory rite, the whole section dealing with Expiatory
Rites (Ch. XI) would he superfluous. For, what accused person would omit
to do the expiation consisting of the mere reciting of mantras, and go
in for the very difficult rites endangering the body and very life
itself? Says an old saying—‘If honey were available in a place within
easy reach, wherefore should one go to the hills? The desired end having
been accomplished, which wise man could put forth further efforts?’—and
again—‘What can he obtained for a single coin, no wise man purchases for
ten coins.’ Nor can the verse be taken as a valedictory supplement to
what forms the subject-matter of the context (*i.e*., Vedic Study),
because there is no ground for connecting it syntactically with the
context,—such grounds, for instance, as being found defective if taken
apart from the context and so forth.”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—The present verse is a direct
Injunction; and the act laid down is done for the removing of sins. It
has been argued that—“What is laid down here (being too easy) could not
be regarded as optional with those rites that are prescribed in a
different context and are very much more difficult.” But it can
certainly be taken as optional with those expiations which consist in
Mantra-recitations. For instance, the reciting of the *Mantra* has been
declared as destroying all sins; and with this what is laid down in the
present verse could be taken as optional. In connection with the
*Aghamarṣaṇa-Mantra*, three days fasting is prescribed, while according
to what is laid down in the present verse, the man becomes freed by
doing th e reciting for a month, but taking two ordinary meals every
day. Thus the difference between the two is not so great as to lead us
to regard them as very diverse in character.

Or, what is mentioned here may be taken as purifying the man from such
past sins as arc indicated by the evil position of planets, etc.; and it
is from these sins that the man becomes free. ‘*Sin*’ is something
undesirable; from this the man *becomes freed*,—*i.e*., is not affected
by the results of those sins.

‘*Just as the snake from the slough*,’—just as the snake becomes freed
from the cast-off skin. This means that the sin is completely removed.

For such past sins as are indicated by the discolouring of the skin and
such other diseases, other *Smṛtis* have prescribed many expiatory
rites. All this we shall explain under the section on Expiatory Rites.

It is in view of what, is said in the present verse that we have the
saying—‘There is no fall for people who go on reciting *mantras* and
pouring libations.’—(79)


