+++
title = "083 एकाक्षरम् परम्"

+++
The ‘*monosyllable*’ is the syllable ‘*om*.’—It is the ‘*Supreme
Brahman*,’ in the sense that it is the means of reaching Brahman. This
assertion is based upon the fact that Brahman is attained by the
‘repeating,’ and ‘the meditation upon the signification,’ of the
syllable (as mentioned in *Yogasūtra* 1.28). ‘*Om*’ is a name of
Brahman; as says the *Yogasūtra* (1.23)—‘The Praṇava is expressive of
Him (God).’

“In comparison with what is this the *highest?*”

It is higher than all other forms of Brahman-meditation. The meditation
upon the syllable ‘*om*’ as Brahman is superior to all the several forms
of meditation mentioned in such texts as ‘One should meditate upon food
as Brahman’ (*Taittirīya Upaniṣad*, 2.2.1), ‘The teaching is that the
Sun is Brahman’ (*Chāndogya Upaniṣad*, 3.19.1); and this for the simple
reason that the attainment of Brahman has been described as proceeding
from the mere recitation of that syllable; and also because the word
itself has been described as ‘Brahman,’ in such passages as—‘One who is
well versed in Brahman in the form of Word attains the supreme Brahman.’
(*Maitry* *upaniṣad*, 6.22). Nothing is beyond the reach of words, and
of' all words the syllable ‘*om*’ is the very source: as says the
*Śruti*—‘Just as the needle pierces through all the leaves, so in the
same manner is all speech pierced by *om*, all this is *om* itself’
(*Chāndogya Upaniṣad*, 2.23.4). The ‘piercing’ spoken of in this passage
means ‘pervasion,’ ‘becoming the receptacle.’ “But in what manner is all
speech *pierced* by *om*?”

Well, as regards the *word* of the Veda, it has already been pointed out
(in verse 74) that its source lies in the syllable ‘*om*’ As regards the
words of secular speech, it has been declared by Āpastamba (1.4.13.9)
that ‘All sentences should be preceded by *om*.’

The above passage (from the Chāndogya) has been explained differently in
the *Upaniṣad-bhāṣya*; we are not reproducing that explanation here, as
it has no bearing on the present context.

The term ‘*breath-suspension*’ here stands for the act of suspending the
breath along with the entire procedure beginning with the sipping of
water.

‘*Highest austerity*—*i.e*., an austerity higher than the Cāndrāvaṇa and
the rest.

“What is the *superiority* here (meant by the epithet ‘*highest’)?*”

It is purely figurative.

‘*There is nothing higher than the Sāvitrī*’;—*i.e*., no other *mantra*.

In praise of all this we have the next expression—‘*Truth is better than
silence*’ ‘*Silence*’ is control of speech. And the result accruing from
the telling of truth is superior to that resulting from the control of
speech. Since the *telling of truth* implies the acting up to a positive
injunction, while in *silence* there is observance of the mere
prohibition of telling lies.

This verse is purely valedictory.—(83)


