+++
title = "084 क्षरन्ति सर्वा"

+++
All acts laid down in the Veda—‘*oblations*’ in the form of *Agnihotra*
and the rest,—as also ‘*sacrifices*’ in the form of *Jyotiṣṭoma* and the
rest,—‘*pass away’; i.e*., either they never bring about their results
in their entirety, or even when brought about, those results perish
quickly.

‘*This syllable*’—‘*om*’—is to be known as ‘*imperishable*,’ *i.e*.,
bringing about imperishable results; since for one who has become merged
into Brahman, there is no return to worldly existence. Thus leading to
an imperishable result, the syllable is itself called ‘imperishable.’
One of the two terms ‘*akṣara*,’ one is a noun, which forms the subject
of the sentence, while the other, is the predicate, and is taken in its
literal sense.

That same syllable is also Brahman, and Prajāpati.

This also is purely valedictory.

The expression ‘*juhoti-yajati*’ mentions two verbal roots; and the term
‘*kriyā*’ stands for the actions of (oblation) and *Yāga* (sacrifice)—as
denoted by the two roots. The plural number is due to the multiplicity
of the acts. Or, the two verbal roots may be taken as standing for the
acts of *Homa* and *Yāga* themselves, while ' *kriyā*’ stands for the
other acts of charity and the like. The whole is a copulative
compound—made up of the three terms ‘*juhoti*,’ and ‘*kriyā*’—the acts
of *H* *oma* and *Yāga* being separately mentioned by reason of their
importance.

Some people have held that this praise of the syllable ‘*om*’ by itself
(as apart from the and the verse) is meant to enjoin the repetition of
the syllable; and they argue that this cannot be taken as merely
supplementary to the foregoing injunction of the reciting of the Sāvitrî
along with ‘*om*,’ etc., as no reference to this latter is made in the
present verse; as there is in the case of the sacrifice, in connection
with which we find two passages—(*a*) ‘*Yadaṣṭākapalo bhavati gāyat
chainam brahmavarchasena punāti*,’ and (*b*)
‘*Yannavakapalastṛvṝtaivāsmimstejo* *daḍhāii*,’—where reference is
distinctly made to a foregoing injunction; so that so long as it is
found possible (on the basis of this reference) to connect the
injunctions syntactically (and treat them as a single injunction), there
can be no justification for splitting them up into two distinct
injunctions. In the present instance, on the other hand, when it is said
that ‘*this should be regarded as imperishable*,’ there is no reference
to any thing that has gone before; nor is there any reference made to
the *Sāvitrī*, etc. Por these reasons, the present text is to be taken
as a self-contained injunction, and not as supplementary to something
else. Further, the verbal affix in ‘*jñeyaḥ*’ ‘(should be regarded)’ is
purely injunctive. And this, taken along with the word ‘*brahma*,’ gives
the sense that ‘this should he regarded—*i.e*., meditated upon—as
Brahman’; and this ‘*meditation*’ stands for the mental process of
repeating the syllable.—(84)


