+++
title = "085 विधियज्ञाज् जपयज्ञो"

+++
The ‘*enjoined offering*’ is that which forms the subject of
injunctions; such as *Jyotiṣṭoma* and the rest; such acts are called
‘enjoined offering,’ as they have been enjoined by words like ‘should
offer’ and the rest, and are performed by means of external acts, and
with the full accompaniment of priests and other innumerable details.

The *Japa*, ‘ Repeating of Mantras’ is not an ‘offering’; but with a
view to eulogise it, it has been spoken as an ‘offering’ only
figuratively; consequently this cannot be included under the term
‘enjoined offering.’

This latter ‘*excels*,’—is a better, superior, offering than the
*Jyotiṣṭoma* and the rest,—‘*ten times*’.

What is meant here is that the Repeating of Mantras is highly
efficacious; the meaning being that the results proceeding from the
Repetition are the same, but larger, as those proceeding from the
Ritualistic Offerings. It is not meant that the Repeating of Mantras
actually brings about results larger than those brought about by the
ritualistic sacrifices; for if it were really so, who ‘would ever
undertake the performance of the latter, which involve much physical
hardship and the expenditure of much wealth? For these reasons it is
clear that what is said here is a mere praise (of the Repeating of
Mantras); just like the assertion that ‘One attains all desirable ends
by the

Final Oblation.’ All that is meant is that from this act also the same
results follow, in the shape of Heaven and the rest; but the difference
iu the amount of human effort involved leads to the difference in the
degree of the result. And as the text does not specify any particular
result, it should be taken to mean that by the Repeating of Mantras one
obtains the same results—in the shape of heaven, landed property,
children and cattle—as those proceeding from sacrificial performances.

‘*The Inaudible, a hundred times*’—That repeating of Mantras is called
Inaudible which is not heard by any other person, however near he may
be.

‘*A thousand times—the Mental*.’—That in which the Mantra in meditated
upon by a mere mental operation.

The ‘Inaudible’ and other qualifications pertain to all kinds of
Repeating Mantras (and not only to the repeating of the *Gāyatrī*,
etc.); the continuity of the context, starting from verse 82, having
been broken. Hence, whenever there is repetition of Mantras—in the
course of either Expiatory Rites, or the rites performed for the
allaying of portents, or those intended to bring about prosperity,—the
said qualifications become applicable.

The term ‘*sāhasra*’ literally means *that which has a thousand*; and
since the noun spoken of is ‘*guṇa*,’ ‘times,’ ‘fold,’ the term means
‘thousand-fold’; the term ‘fold’ standing for *part*. That this refers
to the *excess of results* is clear from the connection of the entire
sentence.—(85)


