+++
title = "088 इन्द्रियाणां विचरताम्"

+++
All that the teaching means is that “one should strive to restrain his
organs”: the rest of the text is merely descriptive, up to the verse
where we have the injunction regarding the Twilight Prayers (101).

‘*Restrain*’—means the avoiding of addiction to prohibited objects and
the avoiding of excessive addiction to even those objects that are
permitted. That the prohibited tilings should be avoided we learn from
those prohibitions themselves: hence the present verse and the verses
that follow should be taken as laying down the avoiding of
over-addiction to even such things as are not prohibited.

This is what is meant by the expression—‘*roaming a many*
*objects*,’—*i.e*., in course of their natural functioning.

‘*Alluring*.’—Things that attract, draw to themselves, overpower, the
man, are called ‘alluring objects,’ those that captivate the mind.
*Roaming* among these means ‘functioning among them in manifold ways.’
If the organs did not operate among them, what could even the most
alluring objects do? Or, even if the organs were devoid of all
restraint, if the objects themselves were repellant, it would he a very
simple matter for the agent, to restrain himself. As a matter of fact,
however, both are at fault (the objects are alluring and the organs are
operative among them); hence it becomes necessary to put forth special
effort, the organs being hard to control.

‘*As the driver restrains the horses*.’—‘*Driver*’ is the *charioteer*.
Just as the charioteer puts forth special effort to coutrol the horses
that are naturally restive, and are prone to run wild along the wrong
way, and the horses become obedient to him,—in the same way one should
curb the organs to his own will.—(88)


