+++
title = "096 न तथैतानि"

+++
“Well, if this is so, then the right course, would appear to be that one
should retire to the forest; as there will be no objects within reach;
and being beyond reach, they would naturally never be sought
after.”—With a view to such notions, the text adds that the organs
should not be subjugated by mere abstinence; as in that case the man
would have no pleasures at all, while the *Smṛti* has distinctly
declared that—‘Acquiring merit, wealth and pleasures, one should see
that his mornings, mid-days and evenings are not useless’ (*Gautama*,
9.46); and further, the continuance of the body itself would become
impossible, by total abstinence. What therefore is meant is to prohibit
excessive longing; and even though one may enjoy pleasures, this
excessive longing ceases under the influence—(*a*) of ‘*knowledge*,’ of
defects in the objects, as described in the scriptures, such for
instance as in 6.76 below,—(*b*) of one’s own experience, whereby the
said pleasures are found to be unpleasant in their consequences,—and
(*c*) of the constant and gradual practice of nonattachment arising from
the due examination of the effects of the pleasures. It is not possible
for the said longing to be renounced all at once..

‘*Ever present*’;—this qualifles ‘*knowledge*.’

‘*Contaminated*’—active, since objects are beset with defects, the
addiction to them is called ‘contamination.’

The ‘*śas*’ used here is one that is frequently used by Vyāsa, Manu and
other great sages,—in such expressions as‘*nityaśaḥ*,’ ‘*anupūrvaśaḥ*,’
‘*sarvaśaḥ*,’ ‘*pūrvaśaḥ*,’ and so forth. But exceptional efforts have
to be made in order to establish the correctness of such usage. And in
as much as the rule regarding the use of the affix ‘*śas*’ as laid down
in *Pāṇini* 5. 4. 43, is that *it is added to singular nouns, in the
sense of repetition*,—it is necessary to make the words in question
imply, somohow or other, the notion of *repetition*. Other people have
explained the expression ‘ś *as*’ as a noun formed from the root ‘*ś*
*as*’ to stand, with the affix ‘*kvip*’; and the word thus formed would
be neuter and would be treated as an adverb, the meaning being—‘*by
knowledge which is ever-standing*.’—(96)


