+++
title = "101 पूर्वां सन्ध्याम्"

+++
‘*Earlier twilight*’ is that when the morning is ahead; and the ‘later
twilight’ is that when the sun sets. During the former ‘*one should
stand, repeating the Sāvitrī*; *i.e*., rising from the seat, one should
desist from moving and continue to remain at the same place. The
‘*Sāvitrī*’ has already been described as the verse ‘*tatsavitur
varenyam*’; and it is this verse that has been referred to in the verse
2.78 laying down the pronouncing of the syllable ‘*om*,’ etc., in
connection with the reciting of the Twilight Prayers.

‘*Till the sun is visible*’—till the blessed God Sun becomes seen.

The present verse contains the injunction of the *Repeating* (of the
*Sāvitrī*) and the *Standing*.

*Question*:—“What is the use of laying down the limit? The ‘twilight’
naturally ceases at sun-rise. For the very definition of ‘Twilight’ is
that ‘it is that time during which darkness is not all gone, nor is
light quite complete.’ It is also thus described—‘When there is
brightness in the sky and darkness on the earth, this time has been
called sacred to the Sun.’ In the *Nirukta* also it is said that ‘When
there is ruddiness below, it is the *Sāvitra* time.’ In works dealing
with animals also it is said—‘From what similarity—because it is ruddy
underneath, and black underneath.’ And as a matter of fact, darkness
ceases entirely at sunrise. It is ‘twilight’ when the characteristics of
neither day nor night have ceased. The Accusative ending in ‘*Sandyām*’
denotes *duration*; hence the meaning is that so long as the time of
twilight continues he should remain standing; and after that the man is
naturally free.”

In answer to this some people have held that the Accusative ending here
does not denote *duration*, it denotes the *objective* itself, in
accordance with the declaration of the author of the *Vārtika* that
‘time conies to be called the object of intransitive verbs.’ As regards
Pāṇini’s rule (2.3.5) laying down the use of the Accusative in the sense
of ‘duration of time and space,’ it refers either to (1) such sentences
as do not contain a verb signifying some action,—*e.g*., ‘the river
crooked *for two miles* (*krośam*),’ ‘blessed *throughout the night*
(*sarva-* *rātram*),’—or (2) where the verb used is a transitive
one,—*e.g*., ‘the book is studied *for a month* (*māsam*).’ In the
present instance however, in the sentence ‘*pūrvām sandhyām
tiṣṭhet*,’—the root ‘*sthū*’ is intransitive. Hence the injunction in
the text must be taken as meant to imply simply that the acts of
*standing* and *sitting* should be done during the two Twilights. The
precise time for the beginning of the acts is not directly laid down;
for the simple reason that it is already implied: the time for the
beginning of the enjoined act is the same as that of the period of
‘twilight.’ This period of ‘twilight’ is not a lengthy one, like that of
the ‘Full Moon Day’ and the like; so that if there were any delay (in
the beginning), the time would be difficult to detect; because the time
falling between the end of night and the beginning of day is extremely
subtle, and the sequence between these two is as difficult to discern as
that between the rising of one and the dipping of another pan of the
weighing scale. The Sun-god is extremely swift in his movements; and the
time intervening between his passing from one zodiacal sign and entering
into another has been regarded by astronomers to be a mere ‘truṭi,’
infinitesimal Similarly with the rising and setting of the Sun as
indicating the beginning and end of the day. Before sun-rise it is
‘Night,’ and after sun-rise it is ‘Day’; and under this explanation
there is no such time as ‘Twilight’; the rising of the sun h aving put
an end to the night. It is for this reason that the performance is begun
at times approximating to sunrise and sunset; and it ceases as soon as
either the sun or the stars become distinctly visible. And hence one who
continues the performance during such time is regarded as having
fulfilled the injunction at the proper time. Thus what is meant by
‘Twilight’ here is just that time which is ‘*Sāvitra*’—pertaining to the
Sun,—and not that infinitesimal point of time postulated in astronomical
works, which has been referred to above.

*Objection*.—“If this is so, then the offering of Twilight Prayers
becomes impossible for those for whom the said time is exactly at which
they perform their *Agnihotra*.”

*Answer*.—What is this objection? In the first place it is only right
that what is enjoined in the *Smṛti* (*i.e*., the Twilight Prayers)
should be set aside by what is enjoined in the *Śruti* (*i.e., the
Agnihotra*). But as a matter of fact, there is no incompatibility
between the two acts; for the Agnihotra-oblations (laid down by *Śruti*)
could very well be offered by one while he is *standing* or *sitting*
(which two acts are enjoined by the present verse).

“But it is not only *standing* and *sitting* that are enjoined by the
present text; the repeating of the threefold Mantra is also prescribed.
So that while one is repeating the (according to the present verse), how
could he, at the same time, recite the Mantras prescribed in connection
with the *Agnihotra* - oblations?”

Well, in that case, the repeating (of the *Sāvitrī*, etc.) might be set
aside; but there would be no such incompatibility in connection with the
acts of *standing* and *sitting*, which are the principal factors in the
present injunction. And in accordance with the principle enunciated in
Jaimini’s *Sūtra* (10. 2. 63), it is only right that the act of
*repeating the Sāvitrī*,—which is only a subordinate factor—should be
set aside. That the acts of *standing* and *sitting* are the principal
factors is shown by the fact that the injunctive words ‘*tiṣṭhet*,
(should stand) ‘*āsīta*’ (‘should sit’) directly enjoin those acts only;
and that the *repeating* of the *Sāvitrī* is the subordinate factor is
shown by the fact that it is spoken of by means of the present
participial epithet (‘*japan*,’ ‘repeating’), which shows that it is
only a qualifying adjunct. And the real connection with the injunction
is of the acts of *standing* and *sitting* only; as is also made clear
by what follows in the next two verses.

Some people have held that in the present context *standing* is the
subordinate and the act of *repeating* the predominant factor, as it is
from the latter that we have read of results following (in verse 78).

In answer to this we make the following observations: The present
context is not intended for persons moved by personal desires; hence why
should the text speak of any desirable results? As regards the
misconception that people h ave regarding the declaration in verse
78—‘He becomes endowed with Vedic merit’—describing the syllable ‘*om*,’
etc., as being a description of results,—this we have already disposed
of under that context. Hence we conclude that in the present context,
*standing* and *sitting* are the predominant factors.

Or, it may be that those who perforin the *Agnihotra* shall recite the
*Sāvitrī* only once, or shall repeat it thrice; and this much of it will
not interfere with the time prescribed for the *Agnihotra*. \[Just as
even though it is stated that ‘in the evening one becomes free by
muttering prayers for a long time,’ yet this does not interfere with the
performance of the *Agnihotra*. The term ‘*aśna*’ stands for *long
time.\]* And yet the said recitation of the *Sāvitrī* would accomplish
the purpose of the Twilight Prayers; specially as the assertion that the
repeating is to go on *till the sun is seen* is only a subordinate
factor in the Injunction (and hence need not be necessarily followed).

\[The above applies to such *Agnihotrins* only as have adopted the time
before sun-rise for their offerings.\] As for those who have adopted the
time *after sunrise*, (the difficulty does not arise, and) the
Agnihotra-oblations would naturally be offered after the Twilight
Prayers have been offered.

Gautama (2.17) speaks of the two Twilight Prayers as to be offered
‘(*a*) while the stars are still visible (at dawn) and (*b*) till such
time as the stars become visible (after sunset)’; and all that this
means is that the time described is to be regarded as ‘Twilight’; and it
does not mean that this time mentioned is part of the Injunction; nor
does it follow that the *Sāvitrī* is to be repeated during the whole of
the time stated. Just as in the case of the Injunction ‘One should offer
sacrifices on the full-moonday,’ it does not mean that the act of
sacrificing is to be repeated during all the time comprised in the time
mentioned; exactly in the same manner, when we have such assertions as
that “the Earlier Twilight-Prayers are to be repeated while the stars
are visible, and the later ones while the sun is still visible,”—all
that is meant is the definition of the two times; the meaning being that
‘such and such a time is what is meant by the term *Twilight*; and it is
at that time that the Twilight-Prayers should be offered.’ Thus then,
the term ‘Twilight’ standing for the period of time mentioned, if one
should perform the *standing* or *sitting* and *mantra-ref tenting* for
only a minute, or for any three or four points of time, he will have
accomplished what is prescribed by the Injunction.

The term ‘*Sadā*,’ ‘*Every day,'* signifies the compulsory character of
the act; and it is to be taken as pertaining to both *Twilights*.

‘*Should sit*’;—‘*sitting*’ standing for any position other than
*standing*, the meaning is that he should be seated.

‘*Ṛkṣa*’ means *stars*. ‘*Ā*’—*i.e*., *till*—they are seen;—the ‘*ā*’
(‘till’) occurring in connection with ‘*arkadarśanāt*’ (in the first
time) should be construed also along with ‘*ṛkṣavibhāvanāt*.’

‘*Samyak*,’ ‘*clearly*,’ qualifies both ‘*darśana*’ and ‘*vibhāvana*’;
the sense being—(*a*) ‘when the sun is seen *clearly*,—*i.e*., the whole
disc becomes visible,’—and (*b*) ‘when the stars are bright, shining in
their full splendour, and not dimmed by the stronger light of the
sun.’—(101)


