+++
title = "102 पूर्वां सन्ध्याम्"

+++
The present verse describes the motive for the act in question.

‘*Sin*’—the guilt born of having recourse to such acts as are
prohibited.

‘*Removes*’—sets aside.

‘*Of the night*’—that which comes about—is committed—during the night.

The term ‘*malam*’ is synoymous with ‘*enaḥ*.’

This cannot mean that the act under question is sufficient expiation for
all the sin that one may have committed during the night and day. For if
it were so, then there would be no point in the prescribing of the
*Kṛcchra* and other specific expiating rites; for the simple reason
that—‘when one can find honey in a frequented place why should he go to
the mountain?’—as the well known saying has it. All that the present
verse means is that the act removes just those minor sins that one might
commit by chance (not habitually), or which could not be avoided,—for
which no specially expiatory rites arc prescribed. For instance, when a
sleeping man throws about his arms or turns upon his sides, he might
cause the death of small insects; or ho may, during sleep, happen to
scratch his private parts, the unnecessary touching of which has been
prohibited; or the uncleanliness that might be caused by the flowing out
of saliva, which is not cleaned immediately; or the having recourse to
prohibited things at improper times. It is in view of such minor sins
that we have the assertion that ‘the man who does not offer the
Twilight-Prayers should at all times be regarded as unclean.

The mention of such results following from the act in question does not
deprive it of its compulsory character; as the sins described are always
liable to be committed. For instauce, during the day also while passing
on the road one comes across strange women, and looks at their faces,
and h as his mind affected by emotions arising therefrom; or, he may
happen to talk in anger, or of indecent things;—all such sins are
removed by the performance of the two Twilight-Prayers.—(102)


