+++
title = "104 अपां समीपे"

+++
This is another injunction in connection with Vedic study; and as what
is here stated has not been mentioned in any other context, the ‘study’
herein laid down must be different from that ‘study’ which is undertaken
for the purpose of getting up the Text.

‘*Forest*’—stands for some solitary spot outside the
village;—‘*retiring*’ to such a spot;—‘*near water*’—on the bank of a
river or tank, etc.; or in the absence of these, even near water
contained in the water-pot and such other vessels.

‘*Niyataḥ'*—may mean either ‘with clean body,’ or‘with due effort.’

‘*Samāhitaḥ*,’ ‘*with collected mind*,’—*i.e*., free from all mental
distractions.

‘*One may even recite the Sāvitrī*,’—*i.e*., if on account of the
interference of some sort of business, he is unable to recite many hymns
or sections or chapters.

‘*Convinced of the necessary character of the injunction*.’—‘*Naityaka*’
is the same as ‘*nitya*.’—Having made up his mind that the injunction is
a compulsory one.

The injunction of studying the Veda for the purpose of getting up the
Text forms the ‘archetype’; and of that the present injunction is the
‘ectype,’ and as such it includes all the details of the former; so that
the rules regarding the pronouncing of the syllable ‘*om*’ at the
beginning of Vedic Study (laid down in 74) and the sitting upon
Kuśa-grass with ends pointing towards the East (laid down in 75),
appertain to the present injunction also.

Others have explained the term ‘*vidhi*’ to stand for ‘*vidhā*,’
*method*, *procedure*; the meaning (of the phrase ‘*naityakam
vidhimāsthitaḥ*’) being ‘taking his stand upon the procedure laid down
for the study of the Veda, which is necessary for,—must be done by—the
Religious Student.’ The compulsory character of this method would have
to be deduced from what follows in verse 106 below, regarding ‘this
being called *Brahmasatra*.’

The former explanation appears to be the right one; for as a matter of
fact, the term ‘*vi* *dhi*’ is not known to be denotative of *method*.
Further, if the term ‘*naityakam*’ stands for what should be done by the
Religious Student, then the same term as occurring in verse 106 will
also have to be taken in the same sense; and in that case the
prohibition of ‘non-study’ therein contained would come to apply to the
same,—*i.e*., to that which must be done by the Religious Student (which
is absurd).—(101)


