+++
title = "105 वेदोपकरणे चैव"

+++
‘*Appurtenance*’ is that which helps; *i.e*., aids to Vedic study; the
subsidiary treatises on Kalpasūtra, Nirukta and so forth. When these are
being studied, no regard—no attention—need he paid to ‘days forbidden
for study’; similarly *with the Mantras recited during
oblations*,—holidays need not be observed; that, is, all this study
should he carried on also during the days forbidden for study.

Another reading (for ‘*anurodhaḥ*’) is ‘*nīrodhaḥ*,’ meaning
‘*cessation*’; the meaning being that even on ‘days forbidden for study’
there is no cessation of the study of what are specified in the verse.

Though it is one of the necessary conditions of the injunction of
‘study’ that there should be no study on holidays, and this injunction
pertains to the ‘study’ of ‘*Svādhyāya*,’ which is Veda,—and the
subsidiary treatises are not called ‘Veda,’—yet people might be led to
think that these latter also are interspersed with passages from the
Veda; hence the Text makes it quite clear.

Or, the ‘subsidiary treatises’ may he taken only as an instance; the
sense being that ‘just as there is no holiday in the case of the
subsidiary Treatises so is there none in the case of the Veda also.’

‘*With Mantras recited during oblations*’;—*i.e*., those Mantras that
are recited during the Agnihotra-oblations, or those recited during the
*Sāvitra* and other propitiatory oblations. All this is merely by way of
illustration. This fact, which is fully sustained by reason, is
explained here for the benefit of persons who might think that the rule
regarding the ceasing of study on holidays pertains to the uttering of
any and every Vedie passage, such as the Mantras included under the
‘*śaśvat-japa*’ and ‘*Praiṣas*,’—all which form the subject-matter of
the injunction of Vedic Study,—and might conclude that on the
*Caturdaśī* and such other holidavs, even the Mantras in connection with
oblations should not be recited. As a matter of fact, the observing of
holidays laid down in connection with Vedic Study prescribed by the
injunction of Study does not pertain to all Veda; and there are no
holidays in connection with Mantras recited during the performance of
religious rites.

‘*In connection with the daily study of the Veda*’;—*i.e*., in
connection with that study of the Veda which has been enjoined in a
preceding text as compulsory for men in all stages of life.—(105)


