+++
title = "106 नैत्यके नाऽस्त्य्"

+++
This verse supplies the valedictory supplement to the foregoing
Injunction.

For the following reason, ‘*in regard to the daily recitation, there is
no day forbidden for study*,’ because ‘*it has been called
Brahmasatra*.’ That is called ‘*Satra*’ which is performed continuously;
just as the *Satra* continues to be performed for thousand years and
more without a break—and the sacrifice consisting of Vedic Study also is
a *Satra*; and because it is a *Satra*, there should he no break in it;
for if there were a break, it would cease to be ‘*Satra*.’

That the Recitation is a *Satra* is further explained by means of a
metaphor. (1) This *Satra* is offered with the offering of
‘Brahman’—*i.e*., study; just as the ordinary *Satra* is offered with
the offering of Soma. The root ‘*hu*’ in this connection stands for
*unceasing offering*, verbal roots being capable of several
significations. The term \* *Brahma*’ indicates the act of study
pertaining to the Veda. The ‘study of Brahma’ is like an ‘offering’;
this compound (‘*Brahmā-huti*’) being in accordance with Pāṇini 2.1.50.

The recitation that is done on the forbidden days supplies the place of
the syllable ‘*v* *aṣaṭ*.’ In the ordinary *Satra*, at the end of each
Yājyā-hymn tho continuity is maintained by the uttering of the syllable
‘*vaṣat*’; and in the same manner, the continuity of ‘Vedic Study’ is
maintained by the recitation that is made on the *Caturdaśī* and other
forbidden days; and this recitation therefore takes the place of the
syllable ‘*vaṣaṭ*.’

The term ‘*vaṣat*’ here indicates the syllable ‘*vauṣaṭ*.’

The *Satra* is ‘*maintained*—*i.e*.’, accomplished—by this syllable. The
compound (‘*vaṣaṭkṛtam*’) being in accordance with Pāṇini 2.1.32.—(106)


