+++
title = "107 यः स्वाध्यायम्"

+++
This also is supplementary to the Injunction under consideration. The
Injunction has been understood to be a compulsory one; and the mention
of results in connection with compulsory injunctions is purely
valedictory; nor do we find any Injunctive affix (in the present verse);
so that the principle enunciated in the *Mīmāṃsā Sūtra* 1.3.5 not
applying to the present case, the mention of ‘milk, curd and the rest’
could not be taken as laying down a fresh motive for another action; and
when the compulsory character of the Injunction has been ascertained,
the principle of the ‘also is not applicable; so tbat ‘milk’ and the
rest could not be regarded as of any use. For all these reasons the
passage must be regarded as a purely valedictory description; and it is
based upon the fact that one who studies the Veda regularly becomes
famous among people, and hence becoming the recipient of gifts of
cattle, be naturally obtains large quantities of milk, etc.

‘*Svādhyāya*’—Veda;—‘*udhīte*’—recites;—‘for one year’—for one full year
;—‘*in due form*,’—*i.e*., seated upon Kuśa-grass with its tips pointing
eastwards;—‘*self-controlled*,’—*i.e*., with the organs under bis full
control;—‘*clean*’—by means of bathing, etc.,; ‘*for him*’—for that
man;—‘*constantly*’—as long as he lives;—‘*pours out*’—makes to flow,
supplies;—‘*this*’—recitation;—‘*milk*, *curd*, *etc*.’

Others hold that the terms ‘*payaḥ*’ (‘milk’) and the rest stand
respectively for Merit, Worldly Prosperity, Pleasure and Pinal
Liberation. Merit is called ‘milk’ because the two are similar in the
point of purity; Worldly Prosperity is called ‘curd,’ because it
resembles the latter in being a source of strengthening the body;
Pleasure is called ‘clarified butter,’ because of the resemblance
consisting in both containing ‘*Sneha*’ (smoothness); Pinal Liberation
is called ‘honey’ because it combines in one all flavours. The meaning
thus is that all the purposes of man are accomplished in a single year,
what to say of the study being continued for a longer time!

As the whole passage is purely valedictory, we need not be very
particular as to what is the right signification of the terms ‘milk’ and
the rest.—(107)


