+++
title = "108 अग्नीन्धनम् भैक्षचर्याम्"

+++
‘*The kindling of fire*’—*i.e*., setting the fire aflame every morning
and evening by supplying fuel to it.

‘*Sleeping on the ground*’;—*i.e*., not ascending a bedstead, not
actually sleeping on the hare ground.

‘*Teacher’s well-being*,’—*i.e*., service consisting of the fetching of
water in jars and such other work. As for the doing of things beneficial
to him, this is to be done throughout life.

All this should be done till that Final Bath, which consists in
returning from the Teacher’s house, and which constitutes the end of
Religious Studentship; for the simple reason that all this is included
in the Injunction of ‘Vedic Study.’ As a matter of fact, the life of the
‘student’ and its appurtenant details have to continue till the Veda is
completely got up; so that as soon as this getting up is done, the
discontinuance of the details follows as a matter of course.

The reiteration of the ‘kindling of fire’ and other duties in the
present verse is meant to indicate that the duties other than
those—which have been previously prescribed for students—are incumbent
upon persons in the succeeding stages of life also (and are not confined
to the ‘student’ only). As says Gautama (3.9),—‘All this is not
incompatible with the succeeding stages of life.’

“But why cannot we have this that the duties specified in the present
verse are to continue during the whole studentship stage, while others
might be discontinued even beforehand?”

The opinion of other *Smṛtis* on this point has been already shown to be
that all rules are laid down in connection with their principal time;
(and this time in the present case being the entire studentship-stage)
if the course just suggested were adopted (and some of the present
duties were dropped before the end of that stage), we would be
needlessly going against this principle.

In place of the expression ‘*gurorhitam*’ the right form would have been
‘*gurave hitam*’ in the Dative, accordingly to Pāṇini 2.1.36, which lays
down the use of the Dative in connection with the term ‘*hita*.’—(108)


