+++
title = "109 आचार्यपुत्रः शुश्रूषुर्"

+++
In verse 233 below the author is going to declare that ‘Of all gifts the
gift of the Veda is the best’; and the question arising as to the sort
of person to whom knowledge should be imparted—the present verse
proceeds to describe the characteristics of the recipient of knowledge.
And this contains the injunction of *teaching*, which is connected with
the section dealing with the duties of the student.

‘*The Teacher’s son*.’—‘*He who is eager to do service*,’
*i.e*.,—personal attendance, or other household work in accordance with
his strength, such as rubbing the body and so forth.

‘*One who imparts knowledge,’—such* knowledge as may not be known to the
Teacher, but which may have been learnt somehow by the pupil; *e.g*.,
sciences dealing with property, love and the arts, or with Dharma; the
teaching of suoh a pupil is by way of exchange of knowledge.

‘*One who is righteous* ';—he who makes it his chief business to perform
the Agnihotra and such religious acts.

‘*One who is clean*’;—one who keeps his body clean with clay and water.

The three words ‘righteous,’ ‘clean’ and ‘gentle’ are not needless
repetitions,—their use being similar to the use of such expressions as
‘*go-balīvarda*’ (where the second term serves to qualify the first).

‘*A near relatice*’—a friend or closely related person.

‘*One who is competent*’—capable of getting up and remembering texts.

‘*One’s own son*,’—who has been previously ‘initiated.’

These ten, even though ‘initiated’ by others, should be taught.

“The text uses the term *dharmataḥ*, which means that by teaching them
one acquires merit. But one who pays money clearly brings a visible
benefit to the teacher; wherefore then can there be any justification
for the assuming of an unseen result—in the shape of *merit*—in this
case?”

Who says that there is to be an *assumption* of unseen results? There
can be no *assumption* of what is directly stated. It has been
distinctly declared tbat “these ten should be taught ‘*for the sake of
merit*.’”

The revered teacher however says that what the term ‘*dharmataḥ*’ means
is that what is here stated is the rule of the sacred law; by teaching
these persons there is no transgression of the law. It does not mean
that by imparting knowledge to one who pays money the teacher acquires
the merit that results from the act of imparting knowledge.—(109)


