+++
title = "112 धर्मार्थौ यत्र"

+++
It has been said above (in 109) that ‘these ten should be taught for the
sake of merit ’; of that same injunction the present verse supplies a
brief reiteration; it does not prescribe anything new, being merely
elucidatory of the preceding injunction.

‘*Wealth*’ should be taken as standing for *benefit* of all kinds; since
the preceding verse has spoken of teaching by way of exchange of
knowledge also.

‘*Adequate*’;—*i.e*., commensurate with the teaching; there being much
service it the teaching is much; and little service if the teaching is
little.

‘*There knowledge*’;—the term ‘knowledge,’ ‘*vidyā*,’ stands for that
*by means of which all things are known; i.e*., the reading of the text
as well as the grasping of the meaning. The meaning is that he who does
not bring any benefit should not be taught the text of the Veda, nor
should the explanation of tho meaning of Vedic texts be expounded to
him.

‘*Ūṣara*’—stands for that plot of land where, on account of the defects
in the soil, seeds do not sprout.

‘*Healthy*’;—corn-seeds of good variety are sown with the help of the
plough, etc. Similarly knowledge also bears excellent fruits when sown
(imparted) on good soil.

It should not be thought that, when one imparts knowledge when paid for
it, it becomes a case of mere barter; because the action (of teaching)
is not preceded by any bargaining as regards the price to be paid, such
as—‘if you give me such and such an amount, I shall impart to you such
an amount of teaching’; while such bargain is the necessary condition of
all ‘barter’; and the mere conferment of the slightest benefit does not
constitute ‘barter.’

Though verse 215 below says that ‘one should not confer any benefit upon
the teacher previously,’—yet this does not quite prohibit the previous
conferring of benefits; it is merely supplementary to the injunction
that ‘when the pupil is going to take the Final Bath, he should, when
asked to do so, bring for his Teacher all that may lie within his
power’; and it is not an independent statement by itself.—(112)


