+++
title = "113 विद्ययैव समम्"

+++
The term ‘*samam*’ means ‘along with.’

It is better that the ‘*expounder of the Veda*’—the student of the
Veda—should die along with his knowledge—unexpounded to any person, and
famishing in his own body—than that it should be taught to unfit
persons.

From what is here said it follows that one who has studied the Veda
should also teach it as a duty, and not merely for making a living; and
that it is not only a person desiring a certain result that is entitled
to the teaching; just as to the giving of water and such other acts it
is not only persons with some motive that arc entitled. Says the
Śruti—‘He who, having studied the Science, does not expound it to those
who need it, becomes an undoer of what he has done;—one should open the
door to welfare; and should teach others; this function of words the
poets describe as leading to fame; all this rests in this act; those
that know this become immortal.’

When the text calls the man ‘an undoer of what he has done,’ what it
means is that the omission of teaching constitutes an offence; and this
implies that teaching is something tbat must be done.

‘*On* *barren* *soil*’;—*i.e*., to a person in whose case none of the
three purposes are fulfilled.

‘*Even in dire distress*’;—*i.e*., e ven in times of troublous calamity;
the ‘distress’ here meant is the absence of properly qualified pupils.

All this would be justified only if teaching were something that must be
done.

“Teaching being compulsory, if fully qualified pupils be not available,
one might fulfil his duty of teaching by getting hold of substitutes,
for qualified pupils; just as in the absence of *Vrīhī* corn, sacrifices
are accomplished by means of *Nīvāra* corn.”

(With a view to guard against this, the text has added that) under the
said circumstances—when properly qualified pupils are not available, the
necessity of performing the work of teaching should cease; just as when
a properly qualified guest is not available, the necessity of the duty
of ‘honouring the guest’ ceases.

‘*Sow*’;—this term which is directly applicable to the seed, indicates
figuratively the work of *teaching*. Just as the seed sown in the field
produces a large outturn, so does knowledge also.

Others have explained ‘*distress*’ as standing for ‘want of wealth.’ The
sense in this case being that even though the man may be in the worst of
conditions, he should not sow in barren soil, he should rather die; and
by so doing the man could not be transgressing the injunction that ‘one
should protect himself from all dangers,’ even though he could have
within his reach the means of livelihood in the shape of teaching
unqualified pupils.

This explanation however is not right. The pupils who pay money cannot
bo called “barren soil”; the term ‘barren soil’ being only a reference
to what has gone in the preceding verses. If the ‘giver of wealth’ also
were not a qualified pupil, then how could there be any chance of the
teacher undertaking the work of teaching him in times of distress,—which
chance is prohibited iu the present verse?—(113)


