+++
title = "117 लौकिकं वैदिकम्"

+++
The subject taken up having been finished, rules regarding salutation
are next taken up.

‘*Laukika*,’ ‘*temporal* is that which, pertains to worldly affairs;
*i.e*., the teaching of popular usage and custom; or it may mean the
teaching of the arts of singing, dancing and playing upon musical
instruments; or, it may mean the knowledge of what is contained in works
dealing with the Arts, such as those of Vātsyāyana, Viśākhin and others.

‘*Vaidika*,’ ‘*scriptural*,’ is that which is expressed by Vedic
injunctions; that is the knowledge of the Veda, the Vedāṅgas and the
Smṛtis.

‘*Knowledge spiritual*’ stands for the esoteric science of the spirit or
soul; or figuratively, it may stand for that pertaining to the Body,
*i.e*., the science of medicine.

From whom one learns all this knowledge, such a teacher, he *should
salute first of all*; when one meets him for the first time (in the day)
he should invite his attention to himself, by means of words indicated
later on, for the purpose of obtaining from him words of blessing.

‘*First*,’—*I.e*., the pupil should address him first; he should not
wait for being addressed by the teacher; it is only in this way that he
would be a ‘saluter.’

*Objection*.—“If this is what is implied by the root *salute* itself,
the term ‘*first*’ becomes superfluous.”

Not so; it is only by virtue of the term ‘first’ that we deduce the said
meaning. If we took only the root and the prefix (in the verb)
‘*abhirādayet*’), we could only get the sense of *speaking*
(‘*vadanam*’) *in front* (‘*ābhimukhyena*’); and this *speaking in
front* is possible also when the speaker has been previously addressed
by another person.

Some people have explained the term ‘first’ to mean ‘before saluting
one’s parents.’ But this does not deserve consideration, as this
relative precedence bears no relation to the context.—(117)


