+++
title = "119 शय्यासने ऽध्याचरिते"

+++
The copulative compound ‘*śayyāsane*’ is formed with the terms ‘*śayyā*’
and ‘*āsana*,’ the singular number being in accordance with Pāṇini
2.4.6, by which‘terms expressing in-animate genuses form copulative
compounds in the singular.’

‘*On a couch and seat*,’ ‘*one should not sit*’—along with—‘*a
superior*’;—*i.e*., one who is superior in learning, such as the teacher
and others.

In view of the question as to whether one should not sit with his
superior anywhere, the text has added the word ‘*adhyācarite*,’
‘*prepared*,’ *i.e*., made up, as the couch or a seat; so that there is
no harm in sitting upon a seat of stone or such other things.

This is only a re-iteration of what is going to be said under 204 below
that—‘One may sit with his teacher on slabs of stone, a boat.’

Others explain the term ‘*adhyācarite*’ to mean ‘*occupied*’; and
‘*should not* *sit*’ to mean that ‘he should not sit upon it even
afterwards.’ And (according to this explanation) the present prohibition
does not apply only to sitting along with the superior; as this
prohibition is already contained in 203; and so long as the present
verse can be taken as an independent injunction, it is not right to take
it as a mere re-iteration.

(In view of this last objection) some people point to a difference
(between what is said here and what comes later on in 203), based upon
usage. That couch or seat which is known to belong specifically to the
Teacher,—that whereupon he, as a rule, lies down and sits,—on that the
pupil should never sit, cither in the presence or absence of the
Teacher; while that couch or seat upon which the Teacher has slept or
sat, once by the way,—sitting upon that during the Teacher’s presence is
what is prohibited. And it is this latter that is meant by the term
‘*adhyāca*’ in the text; which does not mean actual *possession* of the
couch by the Teacher.

While one is seated upon a couch or seat, if the superior should happen
to come, he should rise to meet him and offer hi s salutation. What is
meant by the second line of the verse is that the pupil should descend
from this seat on the advent of the Teacher; the meaning being that
standing upon the bare ground he should entirely relinquish the couch or
seat. While as for superior persons other than the Teacher,—in their
case the rising to meet is done even while one remains (standing) upon
the seat.—(119)


