+++
title = "122 अभिवादात् परम्"

+++
‘*Accosting*’ here stands for that word by which the other person is
addressed, is made to answer, either with words of benediction, or with
an inquiry after welfare. ‘*After this accosting*’—*i.e*., after the
word expressing such accosting,—*i.e*., in immediate sequence to the
word, one should pronounce the following expression—‘*This here I named
so and so*.’ ‘*This so and so*,’ ‘*man*,’ is a pronoun standing for all
particular name-forms. The use of this expression is meant to attract
tho attention (of the person accosted); the sense being—‘you are being
greeted by me,’ *i.e*., ‘you are being invited to pronounce your
benediction’; and being thus addressed, the other person, having duly
comprehended the invitation and request, proceeds to answer the greeting
by means of words expressing benediction.

But the mere use of the generic pronoun ‘this’ would not provide the
idea that ‘you are being accosted by me who am named this’; and in that
case the other person would not fully comprehend the invitation, and
hence to whom would be address the words of benediction? For this
reason, it has been declared that ‘*he should pronounce his name*’; so
that where accosted with the words ‘I am named Devadatta,’ the person
fully comprehends the greeting.

*Objection*.—“There being no use for the word ‘*this*,’ we see no
purpose in its use.”

*Answer*.—Writers often make use of expressions borrowed from the usage
of other *Smṛtis*; for example, they use the term ‘*Dvitīyā*,’ in the
sense of the *Accusative*, in accordance with the usage laid down by
Pāṇini in his Sūtra 2.3.2. In regard to the present subject, we find it
formulated in the *Yajñasūtra* that ‘the mentioning of one’s own name is
to be done with the word *this*.’

*Objection*.—“In that case that the name should be pronounced having
been already expressed by the words ‘*he should pronounce his name*,’—it
is superfluous for the text to repeat the term ‘name,’ in the expression
‘*this I am named*’?”

That expression has been added for the purpose of securing the use of
the term ‘name’; the sense being that, one should pronounce his name
saying ‘I am *named* so and so’ (and not merely ‘I am so and so.’)

According to others, both expressions mean the same thing ‘this here I
am such and such a person’; so that the use of the one or the other
expression is optional.

According to this verse, the exact form of the words of greeting comes
to be this—‘*abhivādaye devadattanāma’ham* *bhoḥ*,’ ‘I accost thee, Sir,
I who am named Devadatta the use of the ‘Sir’ being prescribed in the
following verse (124).

‘*Elder*’—the addition of this word in the text is meant to imply that
there should be *accosting* of equals and inferiors also, but in their
case, the form is not as laid down here, which is meant for the case of
*elders* only.—(122)


