+++
title = "123 नामधेयस्य ये"

+++
From what has come before it might be understood that even an unlearned
person deserves to be saluted, by reason of the large amount of wealth
he might possess; the present verse serves to preclude such a notion.

‘*Those who*,’ being uneducated;—‘*of the name*’—in its Sanskrit form
that may have been pronounced,—‘*the significance, as pronounced in the
words of greeting*’; persons, not conversant with grammar do not
understand the words to mean that ‘I have been accosted by this
person,’—they do not understand the Sanskrit language.—To such persons,
as also to women who deserve to be saluted,—these do not comprehend the
Sanskrit language—the wise one should say simply ‘I salute thee,’ thus
omitting only the mention of his name, which forms one part of the full
injunction. If the persons thus accosted should fail to understand even
this much, then they should be saluted even with corrupt vernacular
forms of words; it is in view of this that the text has added the
epithet ‘*wise*’; *i.e*., when one realises the difficulty of the other
person’s understanding, he should find out some such form of greeting as
might suit each particular case, and he should not stick to the precise
form enjoined in the preceding verse.

‘*Similarly to all women*’; the term ‘all’ implies that the same applies
even to the wives of teachers,—even though they be capable of
understanding Sanskrit words.

Some people have explained that one should pronounce his name only when
it so happens that he is known among people by a pseudonym—some such as
‘*Vanamālīvarṇaḥ*,’—so that the real name given to him by his father is
not known, and what is known is not his real name.

Others have explained the verse to refer to those who do not know the
correct form of answering the salutation; for instance, Pāṇini (8.2.83)
has laid down that the vowel at the end of the name pronounced in
answering a salutation should he pronounced ultra-long; and to those who
do not know this, the wise one should simply say ‘I.’ The author of the
*Mahābhāṣya* (Patañjali) also has said the same in course of his
explanation of the uses of the Science of Grammar—“Ignorant people who
do not know that in answering a salutation, the name should be
pronounced with an ultra-long vowel,—to such persons one may freely say
simply ‘I,’ just as to women.” These writers have said that the term
‘*abhivāda*,’ ‘salutation,’ in the present verse has got to be taken in
the sense of ‘answering a salutation,’ specially on account of what has
been said in other *Smṛtis*. If the present verse is not explained on
these lines, then, the prohibition of salutation, occurring in verse 126
below would come to be taken as prohibiting the saluting of all
unlearned persons; and this would be contrary to what other Smṛti-rules
have laid down regarding the use of the simple form ‘it is I’ (in the
saluting of unlearned persons). If, on the other hand, we adopt the
explanation as here suggested, then the said prohibition (occurring in
1.20) might be taken as purely commendatory, and not mandatory; and this
would be quite consistent with the present explanation.—(123)


