+++
title = "124 भोःशब्दङ् कीर्तयेद्"

+++
‘*At the end of his own name one should pronounce the term Oh, Sir*.’The
epithet ‘*own*’ has been added with a view to precluding the possibility
of the name of the saluted person being understood to be meant.

The rest of the verse is purely valedictory.

The term should be pronounced, immediately after the letters of the
name, but after some, other letters also, such as the expression ‘I am’
(as laid down in verse, 122, above). The presence of the particle
‘*iti*’ (in verse 122, after ‘*ahamasmi*’) is meant to define the actual
form of the expression to be used; the sense being that such is the
actual form of the expression to be used; Further, if the expression
were wrongly used iu the form ‘Devadatta, Oh, Sir, I am,’ the
comprehension of its meaning (by the accosted person) would be delayed,
and this would still further delay the inviting of his attention; and
this would defeat the purpose of the salutation. And it may also happen
that when the expression used is one not amenable to simple
construction, the other party does not comprehend it at all.

‘*Form*’—the existence of very essence. Or, it may mean that it comes in
lieu of the name of the accosted person; *i.e*., comes in place of the
name; and the name of the accosted person is. not pronounced. The term
‘*bhāta*’ may mean either that which is accomplished by means of
existence, or that which is accomplished by means of an agent.

Or, we may read ‘*svarūpabhāve*,’ with the locative ending.

‘*The form, Oh, Sir*’;—*i.e*., the presence, the existence, of the
term‘Oh, Sir’—‘*is, the form of* *all* *names*.’ Just as one is
addressed by having his name uttered—‘Oh, Devadatta, listen to me,’
similarly the term *bhoḥ*’ (Oh, Sir)—which ends in the Vocative
case-ending—is used for the purposes of address; this has been so
declared by the sages.—(124)


