+++
title = "125 आयुष्मान् भव"

+++
On salutation having been done, the answering greeting should be made by
the Father to the accoster, with the words—‘Be long-lived, Oh Gentle
One.’ The particle ‘*iti*’ in the text is meant to show that the
preceding words constitute the formula. The use of such expressions also
as (*a*) ‘*āyuṣmān edhi*,’ ' Prosper O Long-lived One,’ (*b*)
‘*dīrghāyurbhūyāh*,’ ‘Be long-lived,’ (*c*) ‘*cirañjīva*,’ ‘Live
long’—is permitted by the usage of cultured men.

‘*The vowel* “a”’—which occurs at the end of the name of the person
whose salutation is answered—‘*should be pronounced ultra-long*.’ The
term ‘*pluta*,’ ‘ultra-long,’ stands for the vowel that is drawn out to
the length of three moras. The vowel ‘a’ is mentioned only by way of
illustration; it stands for ‘i’ and other vowels also. The ‘*end*’
spoken of in the text is in relation to the vowels only; so that in the
case of names ending in consonants also, the lengthening applies to the
vowel that happens to be the *last*, ‘at the end.’ The term
‘*pūrvākṣaraḥ*’ qualities the ‘vowel *a*,’ which is to be lengthened;
and ‘*akṣara*’ here stands for the *consonant*; and the compound means
‘that vowel of which the preceding syllable is a consonant’; *i.e*., the
vowel occurring along with the consonant. What is meant is that it is
the vowel ‘a’ already there tbat is to be lengthened, and not any such
vowel as might be added; that is, the vowel that is already present in
the name is to be lengthened out.

All this explanation is in accordance with the rules of the revered
Pāṇini; as in the matter of the use of words and their meaning, the
revered Pāṇini is more authoritative than Manu and other writers. And
Pāṇini has laid down (in 8.2.83) that ‘in answering tile greeting of a
non-śūdra, the *ṭi* should be ultra-long and the name ‘*ṭi*’ is given to
that syllable of which the last vowel forms the beginning (which in tho
present case is the ‘*a*,’ which is regarded as a part of itself and
hence ‘having the last vowel for its beginning’). No significance is
meant to be attached to the specification of the ‘*Brāhmaṇa*’ in the
present verse; as what is here prescribed is applicable to the
*Kṣatriya* and others also. The usage sanctioned by other Smṛtis is also
the same, and no separate rules are laid down for these other castes.

As an example we have such expressions as ‘Be long-lived, O Devaḍattā’;
and one containing a name ending in consonant,—‘Be long lived, O
Somaśarmān.’—(125)


