+++
title = "128 अवाच्यो दीक्षितो"

+++
At the time of answering a greeting, as also on other occasions, one who
has been ‘*initiated*,’—that is, during the time beginning from the
performance of *Dīkṣaṇīyā Īṣṭi* and ending with the Final Bath—should
not be addressed by name; *i.e*., his name should not he uttered.

‘*Younger*’—born not very long ago.

The term ‘*api*’ ‘even,’ leads us to infer that of the elder person one
should not utter the name, even though he he n *ot initiated*. Says
Gautama (2.23)—‘The name and gotra of one’s superior should bo uttered
with *māna*, reverence’;—‘*māna*’ here stands for *reverence*’, and the
meaning is that the name should he uttered with reverence; *e.g*., in
some such form as ‘the highly revered lord, Janārdana Miśra.’

*Question*—“How then is one to converse with an initiated person, on
matters of business?”

It should begin with such terms as ‘sir’ and ‘your worship.’ That is,
ono should address the initiated person, after having pronounced the
word ‘Sir,’ and then by such names as ‘Initiate’ (), ‘sacrificer’
(‘*yajamāna*’) and the like, which are applicable to him in their
denotative sense. It does not mean that after having pronounced the term
‘sir,’ he should be addressed by name.

The passage being construed as—‘the address which is preceded by the
terms *sir* and *your worship*,’—in view of the fact that it is not
possible to use both the terms in the same sentence, people have laid
down the following rule—(*a*) when one is conversing with him directly,
then he should be addressed with the term *sir, Bhoḥ*, which contains a
vocative ending; (*b*)and when his qualities are being described to some
one else, then one should use such words as ‘such and such a thing has
been done by his worship the Initiate,’ ‘his worship does so and so.’
The text mentions only the basic from ‘*bhavat*’ (‘your worship’), and
it is to be used with such case-endings as may fit in with the sentence
in which it is contained.—(128)


