+++
title = "133 पितुर् भगिन्याम्"

+++
The present text serves to indicate the propriety of behaving, as
towards one’s mother, towards the sister of his father, and the sister
of his mother, and also towards bis own elder sister.

*Objection*.—“The treatment to be accorded towards the father’s and the
mother’s sister has already been prescribed under 131 above. It might be
argued that in verse 131 it is said that they should be treated like the
*Teacher’s wife*, while in the present verse they are described as to be
treated like one’s *mother*. But this makes no difference; as the
behaviour towards the mother is precisely the same as that towards the
Teacher’s wife.”

To this some people make the following answer: The venerable character
of the father’s and the mother’s sister has been re-asserted only for
the purpose of adding that ‘*the mother is more venerable than these*.’
The meaning is that when one’s mother directs him one way, and the
father’s sister and the rest another way, he should act according to the
directions of his mother, and not according to those of the others. It
will not be right to argue that this (superiority of the mother) is also
already declared under verse 145; because this latter verse is purely
valedictory.

Others however hold that, there is some difference in the treatment to
be accorded to the mother and to the Teacher’s wife. In the case of the
Teacher’s wife, worship, etc., are necessary; while in the case of the
mother, it is often otherwise also, because of the son being too young,
or because of the mother being too fond of him. And since the father’s
sister and the mother’s sister also fondle the child (like his mother),
it is only natural that these should be treated like the mother.
Fondling during childhood is done by one’s own older sister also. But
when one has passed beyond childhood, his treatment of these relatives
should be like that of his teacher’s wife. All this is not got out of
the present verse only. And if we did not have both declarations (one in
the present verse, and Another in 131), then the mere assertion of
‘behaviour as towards his mother’ would be liable to be understood as
referring to salutation only, as it is this that forms the
subject-matter of the context; while as a matter of fact, it is the
*loving behaviour* that is here intended to be accorded.—(133)


