+++
title = "134 दशाब्दाख्यम् पौरसख्यम्"

+++
It has been said above (under 120) that ‘the life-breaths of the younger
men rush outwards at the approach of the elder now the present verse
proceeds to determine by bow many years one may be regarded as an
‘elder’; among ordinary men people come to be regarded as ‘elderly’ when
they become grey-headed.

Among citizens, equality and friendship are regarded as subsisting among
people who differ in their age by ten years, so that among these, one
conies to be regarded as ‘elder’ when he happens to be more than ten
years older; and those less than that should be treated as ‘friends and
equals’; and hence accosted as ‘Oh, Sir,’ as declared by Gautama
(6.14)—“Equals in age should be accosted as ‘Oh, Sir’; when the
difference in age is more than ten years, the person should be regarded
as ‘elder.’

In the expression ‘*daśābdākhya*,’ ‘*ākhyā*’ stands for ‘*ākhyānam*,’
‘*description*’; and the compound, a three-termed *Bahuvrīhi*, means
‘that whose description is ten years’; the years being construed as
qualifying ‘friendship’ on the basis of ‘description,’ and no
significance being attached to the difference between cause and effect
(the ‘years’ being the cause of the ‘friendship’), all that the compound
means is that—‘one who is senior by about ten years is an equal friend.’

‘*Pauras*,’ ‘*citizens*,’ are ‘persons living in cities.’ The mention of
‘cities’ is only by way of illustration; the same rule holds good among
inhabitants of villages also. Among people living in the same village,
all those come to be regarded as ‘friends’ among whom there happens to
be some ground for close intimacy.

Those persons who practise some sort of *art*—crafts, music and the
rest,—among these one who is older by less than five years is an
‘equal’; beyond that, he is ‘elder.’

‘*Tryabdam*’ means ‘that which is preceded by three years’; and of this
kind is the ‘equality’ among learned men.

‘*Among blood-relations, it ranges within a very short period of
time*’;—*i.e*., among persons belonging to the same family, he who is
senior by only a few days is also ‘elder.’

“What period of time is to be regarded as *very short*?”

It cannot he *three years*; for having spoken of three ‘*years*,’ the
text mentions ‘short,’ which means that it must be less than that. It
cannot mean *two* years, because of the singular number. Nor lastly, can
it mean *one* year, as in that case there would be no point in the
qualification ‘*very short*.’ Because ‘year’ is the name given to a
well-defined period of time; so that a period of time which is less than
that even by a single day ceases to be a ‘year.’ For these reasons
‘*short*’ must refer to time in general (unspecified), the only
peculiarity being tbat it, should be less than a year.

The particle ‘*ca*’ should be taken as standing for ‘*?va*,’ ‘*only*’;
the meaning being ‘*friendship* ranges only within a very short period
of time, beyond that the man becomes *elder*.’ All this should be taken
as holding good only among people of the same caste, possessed of
similar qualifications; so that the definition of ‘elder’ as something
relative in sense is that obtaining among ordinary people.

Other persons explain the verso as follows:—This verse does not define
what is tho characteristic of being ‘elder’; it only serves to define
‘Friendship.’ It could be taken as defining ‘elderliness’ only if we
abandoned its direct meaning; as only then could it be taken to mean
that ‘during such time one is a friend, and after that he becomes an
*elder*.’ As a matter of fact, what the verse means is as follows:—(*a*)
People who live in the same city for ten years become ‘friends’; (*b*)
among people knowing the arts—sixty-four in number—companionship during
five years establishes ‘friendship’; (*c*) among blood-relations,
friendship is established by living together even for a very short time.
Thus then, one does not become a ‘friend’ simply because he happens to
be of equal age, in fact the ‘friend’ is as described; but the said
conditions of ‘friendship’ all require tbat the parties concerned be of
equal age.

All this may be true; but this explanation is inconsistent with the next
verse; in the latter, ‘caste’ is mentioned as the pre-eminent factor,
and not the age; and the reason is that if the mere fact of being so
many years older in age were to make one ‘elder,’ then we could not get
rid of the contingency of persons of different (and inferior) castes
being regarded as ‘elders.’

Older commentators have all adopted the first explanation (put forward
by us).—(134)


