+++
title = "136 वित्तम् बन्धुर्"

+++
Caste has been described as a ground of superiority; so that one
belonging to a higher caste should be respected by one of a lower caste.
The text now proceeds to describe the relative strength of those factors
that entitle persons of a caste to salutation and honour among
themselves.

*Age* is mentioned here again only for the purpose of indicating its
position as compared with others.

In the case of all that is mentioned here it is the connection of the
person with them that entitles him to respect. That is, *the possession
of wealth* and the *possession of relations* constitute titles of
respect. It is not meant that the peculiar relationship borne by the
man—such as that of being a paternal or a maternal uncle—constitutes the
title of respect; what is meant is that one who has many relations
deserves to be respected.

‘*Age*’—*i.e*., advanced age. The term is generally used in this
qualified sense ; *e. g*., in such passages as—‘Even though the son be
of age, he should be advised by his father.’ Verse 134 has already
explained what age entitles one to respect

‘*Action*’—such as is laid down in *Śrutis* and *Smṛtis*; *i. e*., one’s
assiduity in performing such actions.

‘*Learning*,’—the knowledge of the Veda along with the subsidiary
sciences and their auxiliaries.

*Objection*.—“In view of such declarations as ‘the learned man offers
sacrifices,’ ‘the learned man officiates at sacrifices,’ the unlearned
person can never be entitled to the performance of religious acts; under
the circumstances, how can mere ‘action,’ without ‘learning,’ be a
ground for respect?”

*Answer*.—There is no force in this objection. *Excellence* is what is
meant here. Superior or efficient learning is what constitutes a title
to respect; and as for the performance of actions, this can be done also
by men possessed of limited learning; for a man is entitled to perform
actions in accordance with the knowledge possessed by him: specially as
‘*learning*’ entitles a person to the performance of actions simply
because it serves to capacitate him for it, and not because it has been
declared to be a necessary condition.

“But the man devoid of learning cannot know the form of the action to be
performed, and being capable of acting only like lower animals, to the
performance of what could he be entitled?”

Even such a person can, on having heard a few Smṛti-texts, perform
austerities and repeat *mantras*. It is only in the performance of the
Agnihotra and such other Vedic rites that one requires the knowledge of
Vedic texts. But here also the title to perform the rites is dependent
upon the extent of knowledge possessed by the man; *e.g*., one who knows
the meaning of tho texts bearing upon the *Agnihotra* is entitled to its
performance; the knowledge of other sacrifices is of no use in that.

The following argument might be urged here—“We have the injunction ‘the
entire Veda should be studied,’ which pertains to the whole Veda, and
implies the thorough understanding of the whole; and when it is
necessary to understand the meaning of the entire Veda, how can there be
any such partial knowledge as could justify such an assertion as that
‘he who knows the meaning of the texts bearing on the Agnihotra shall be
entitled to the performance of that act, even though he be ignorant of
the meaning of other texts?’”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—It is the study of one Vedic
Recension that is necessary; and what we mean is that he who has studied
one Recension and has fully understood its meaning, becomes entitled to
the performance of Vedic acts, even without studying the other
Recensions.

“The purpose of the Scripture is the same in all cases; even though
there may be some difference in the order of a few words and syllables,
yet the main feature of the Scripture remains the same. Then again, as
for the understanding of the meaning, this is obtained by the due
comprehension of the meanings of words and reasonings; now, neither the
meanings of words, nor the reasonings, differ in the different
Recensions. So that the means by which one learns the meaning of one
Recension serves the same purpose in regard to the other Recensions
also; and one does not stand in need of any other learning; so that if
One Recension has been learnt, all become learnt.”

True. Such Agnihotra, etc., as are enjoined in one Recension may not
differ from the same acts as enjoined in other Recensions; but there are
certain actions which are not enjoined at all in certain Recensions.
*E.g*., the *Śyena* and other malevolent rites in connection with the
Darśa-pūrṇamāsa are not found in the Aśvalāyana Recension of the Ṛgveda;
nor the Somayāga, the Vājapeva, the Bṛhaspatisava and so forth. So that
when a man has learnt one Recension, he becomes entitled to that
Agnihotra and that Jyotiṣṭoma, etc., which are enjoined iu that
Recension_(;) and if one who has not studied another Recension, and has
neither read nor heard of it, how can he know anything about the acts
enjoined in that other Recension? Nor ore the Soma-sacrifices
compulsory; so that, through fear of incurring the sin of omitting a
compulsory act, one might be forced to seek for the knowledge of them
from other Recensions. As for the ‘Kindling of Fire,’ even though this
also is not found enjoined in the said Āśvalāyana recension of the
Ṛgveda, yet it does contain the injunction of preparing the ‘Āhavanīya’
fire; as is clear from such passages as ‘bring up the Āhavanīya’; so
that, not understanding the meaning of this passage with the help of
ordinary people, the student naturally seeks, from other Recensions, for
the knowledge of what this ‘*Āhavanīya*’ is; and thus he comes to look
over the entire section of the other Recension dealing with the
‘Kindling of Fire.’ Similarly having heard the passage—‘Having offered
either the Amāvāsyā or the Paurṇamāsa libations, etc.,’ one seeks from
other Recensions for the knowledge of the exact form of the two acts (of
Amāvāsyā and Paurṇamāsa offerings). Similarly in the case of other
compulsory and optional acts that have to be performed, when it is found
that some of their details arc not laid down in a certain
Recension,—-such details, for instance, as pertain to the Adhvaryu (and
are mentioned in the Yajurveda) or to the *Udgātṛ* (and are mentioned in
the Sāma-Veda),—the requisite knowledge is sought for from those other
texts. It is not possible for one to know the act that is laid down in
Recensions other than the one studied by him. To the student who learns
several Recensions, and studies their meanings, all this becomes quite
clear. But even in the absence of such knowledge as this last, the
performance of acts is quite possible. Or, such performance could be
possible even on a slight understanding (of the Vedic texts).

The sense of all this is that in the case of one whose learning is
flawless, and who is fit to explain all sciences, such learning
constitutes a title to respect.

‘*Weightier*.’—The comparative ending indicates that the comparison is
between two and two out of the five mentioned. Thus one who is fully
versed in all the fourteeu sciences, is respected through his
‘*learning*,’ even though he he not entitled to it on account of being
lame, blind or poor.

The text points out the relative superiority of these, with a view to
cases where there may *i.e* a conflict among them.—

‘*Among these that which follow is weightier than that which precedes
it*.’ For instance, when one man has vast wealth, and the other has many
relations, then the latter deserves higher respect than the former; for
that which follows is ‘weightier’ than that which precedes it. Similarly
*Age* is weightier than *Relation*. And from this it follows that *Age*
is weightier still than *Wealth*. From all this it is clear that
‘Learning is superior to all, for all Dharma is based upon it,’ as has
been declared by Gautama (6-21—22).

*Objection*.—“Since the preceding factor is not *weighty*, how can we
have the comparative form ‘*weightier*’? It is only when there are two
*weighty* things that one can be called *weightier*; and since in the
present case is, *ex hypothesi*, in relation to something preceding
there can be no *weightiness* in ‘wealth,’ which is not preceded by any
thing else.”

What is meant is that the whole lot of five being ‘weighty’ in common,
the comparative ending is rightly used as showing that one is
*weightier* than the other.

‘*Māna*’ means *respect*; ‘*sthāna*’ means *ground, cause*.

If we adopt the reading ‘*Mānyasthānāni*,’ the term ‘*mānya*’ is to be
explained as having the force of the abstract noun; ‘*mānya*’ standing
for ‘*mānyatva*.’—(136)

It has just been declared that among persons each of whom possesses only
one of the qualifications mentioned, one possessing the latter is to be
regarded as superior to one possessing the former. Now the question
arises—between two persons, one of whom possesses two former
qualifications and the other possesses only one latter qualification,
who is to be treated as superior? The following verse answers this
question.


