+++
title = "137 पञ्चानान् त्रिषु"

+++
‘*Of these five*’ grounds of respect;—he in whom there are ‘*a* *larger
number*’—not all—‘*deserves respect*.’ And here the mere sequence (or
posteriority) of the qualifications should not be much heeded. For
instance, when one man possesses *wealth* and *relations*, and the other
possesses only *old age*,—the former gets preference over the latter.

But even when there are several qualities present, if they are not of
high degree,—while the single quality possessed by the other person is
of very high degree,—then both are equal; and the larger number do not
get over the latter (superior) qualification.

When the former verse uses the term ‘*weightier*,’ it only means
superiority in comparison to one (not several) of the preceding ones.

When however in one person there are a *larger number of preceding
qualities* and also *of high degree*,—of great excellence,—while in the
other person there are present the same number of *succeeding*
qualities,—so that the number of preceding and succeeding qualifications
(possessed by the two men) are equal,—then, there is no getting over the
one by the other, simply on the ground of precedence (in enumeration);
in this case both are to he regarded as equal.

“Since what the text declares is that he is deserving of respect in whom
the qualities are of high degree,—it would he right to conclude that in
the case just mentioned where the two persons possess an equal *number*
of qualities (hut the preceding ones are of higher degree), the presence
of the preceding set should get over the other.”

Not so; the epithet ‘*of high degree*’ is meant to apply to the case
where the two sets of qualities are equal; *e.g*., where the one as well
as the other is possessed of *learning*, superiority belongs to one
whose learning is of the superior order. Similarly with the other
qualities.

‘*Among the three Castes*,’—*i.e*., among Brāhmaṇas, Kṣatriyas and
Vaiśyas. If the said qualities, many in number and of high degree,
belong to the *Kṣatriya*, then such a Kṣatriya deserves to be respected
by the Brāhmaṇa possessed of inferior qualities, even though he belongs
to the higher caste. The Vaiśya, similarly, is to be respected by the
Kṣatriya.

Similarly by all the twice-born castes the *Śūdra* should be respected,
‘*when he has reached the tenth stage*.’ The ‘*tenth*’ stands for the
last stage of life, and indicates *extreme old age*. Thus then, in case
of the Śūdra, ‘wealth’ and ‘relations’ do not constitute grounds of
respect, in relation to tho three higher castes. This is clear from the
fact, that the Text specifies the ‘tenth stage.’ ‘Action’ and ‘Learning’
are not possible in the Śūdra; for the simple reason that he is not
entitled to these.

‘*Most*’;—all that is meant by this is *excess*, not *plurality of
number* (which would mean at least *three*); hence what is asserted
applies to tho presence of qualities also. There is nothing to justify
the notion that the term ‘*bahu*’ (from which ‘*bhūyāmsi* is derived’)
denotes *number*. Further, the term actually used is ‘*bhūyaḥ*,’ not
‘*bāhu*’; and the former is often found to be used in the sense of
*excess, much*: *e.g*., ‘*bhūyāṅśchātra parihāro*,’ ‘there is *much*
that can be said in answer to this,’ ‘*bhūyābhyudayena yokṣye,'* ‘I
shall become endowed with *much* prosperity.’ Nor is any significance
meant to be attached to the plural number in ‘*bhūyāmsi*’; the plural
number in this case denoting only *kind*, according to Pāṇini 3.2.58,
which lays down that ‘when a kind or genus is spoken of, the plural
number is optionally used.’ If significance were really meant to be
attached to the plural number, then a person possessed of only one
quality (of however high degree) would never be entitled to respect; and
this would run counter to what we h ave learnt from the foregoing verse.
Furthor, by speaking of —‘*the Śūdra who has reached the tenth
stage*’—where mere *age* (only one quality) is mentioned as a ground of
respect,—the Text has made it clear that no significance is meant to be
attached to the plural number (in ‘*bhūyāmsi*’). Usage also points to
the same conclusion.—(1.37)


