+++
title = "138 चक्रिणो दशमीस्थस्य"

+++
Another method of showing respect is also described by the way.

‘*Chakrin*’ is the person in a chariot, one who is occupying a cart or
some such conveyance. For him ‘*way should be made*.’ ‘*Way*’ is that
path, that part of the Earth, by which one goes to a village and such
other places; while one is on such a ‘way,’ if a man in a chariot should
happen to come either in front of him or behind him, then the man on
foot should move off from the spot where he might be obstructing the
passing of the cart.

‘*One who is in the tenth stage of life*’—one who is far advanced in
age.

‘*One suffering from a disease*’—one who is suffering very badly from
some malady.

‘*One who is carrying* a *burden*’—one who is carrying grains and other
heavy things; such a man also finds it difficult to move, and hence must
bo favoured.

‘*A woman*,’—*i.e*., simply by reason of her being a woman, irrespective
of her caste or qualifications, or of the position of her husband.

‘*King*’—stands here for the master of a kingdom, not for the mere
*Kṣatriya*. For in the conclusion (which comes in the next verse) we
have the term ‘*Pārthiva*’ which means the ‘lord of the Earth,’
‘*pṛthivyāḥ īśvaraḥ*.’

*Objection*.—“In as much as in the opening verse (the present) we have
the term ‘*rājan*,’ it would be more reasonable to interpret the term
‘*parthiva*’ (in the next verse) in accordance with, and as standing
for, the ‘*Rājā*’ (than that ‘Rājā’ should be taken as standing for the
‘*pārthiva*’), and the word ‘*Rājan*’ is well-known as denoting the
*Kṣatriya* caste; and as this forms the principal denotation of the
term, it should be accepted in the opening of the passage, specially as
there does not appear to be any incongruity in it. In the next verse,
where the relative merits are mentioned, it is quite possible to take
the term ‘*parthiva*’ as referring to the *Kṣatriya*; in view of the
fact that the ‘protecting of the Earth,’ which is connoted by the term
‘*pārtiva*.’ is a duty prescribed specifically for the *Kṣatriya*. So
that it cannot be right, to take the term as referring to other castes,
merely on the strength of their being ‘*in possession of land*’
(‘*pṛthīvyāḥ* *īśvaraḥ*’).”

To the above we make the following reply:—What is asserted here (in the
next verse) is *capability being respected*;—when, *e.g*., the person
who has just passed out of hi s studentship is described as deserving to
be honoured by a king. Under verse 35, it has been pointed out that the
term ‘*bhūmipa*’ stands for the *Kṣatriya* caste; and since the Kingly
caste is merely indicative, what is mentioned here is understood to
pertain to such a Kṣatriya as happens to be the ‘lord of men.’

The ‘*bridegroom*’—who is going to marry. For these persons ‘*way should
be made*;’—what is meant by ‘*deyaḥ*,’ ‘*should be made*,’ is simply
that one should give up the road; and as ‘giving up’ only means *moving
off* (and not actual *giving*), the Dative ending has not been
used.—(138)


