+++
title = "140 उपनीय तु"

+++
The present section is taken up for determining the exact signification
of ‘*Ācārya*’ (Preceptor) and other terms. As a matter of fact, people
make use of these names on the basis of certain qualifications; and this
particular matter has not been dealt with by Pāṇini and other writers on
the subject of the meanings of words. What the present text says
regarding the meaning of the titles is based, like the Smṛti of Pāṇini
and others, upon usage, not upon the Veda; as it does not prescribe
anything *to be done*; that such and such a word means such and such a
thing is a *well-established fact*, not something *to be accomplished*.

‘*Having initiated*,’—*i.e*., having performed the Initiatory Rite,—‘*he
who teaches*’—makes him get up—‘*the Veda*’—is the ‘preceptor.’ The
‘getting up’ of the Veda here meant consists in the remembering of the
exact words of the text, independently of other learners.

‘*Kalpa*,’ ‘*Ritualistic Treatise*,’—stands here for all the Subsidiary
Sciences.—‘*Esoteric Treatises*’ are the Upaniṣads. Though these latter
also are inoluded under the name ‘Veda,’ yet the text has mentioned them
separately by the name ‘Esoteric Treatises,’ with a view to remove the
misconception that these are not Veda,—a misconception that might arise
from the fact that they have a second name ‘*Vedānta*,’ where the term
‘*anta*’ denotes ‘proximity’ (only, not *identity*).

Others have explained the term ‘*rahasya*,’ ‘*Esoteric Treatises*,’ to
mean ‘the meaning of the Vedic texts’; and by this explanation, the
teaching of the verbal text only would not make one a ‘Teacher,’ it
would be necessary ‘for him to explain the meaning also.’ To this effect
we have the following declaration in the *Abhidhāna-Kośa*;—‘He who
expounds the meanings of mantras is called the *Preceptor*”;—here the
term ‘*mantra*’ stands for all Vedic passages.

In accordance with this explanation, the learning of the meaning also,
and not the mere getting up of the Text, would be prompted by the
injunction of ‘becoming a Preceptor so that for every man the injunction
of Vedic study would come to be carried out by other persons.

“That may be so; but even when the Injunction of Vedic study is carried
out by other persons, the purpose of the student becomes accomplished
all the same.”

In that case then, since ‘becoming a Preceptor’ is a purely voluntary
act, if the Teacher does not have recourse to the necessary activity,
then the carying out of the injunction of Vedic study would remain
unaccomplished; so that this injunction of Vedic study would no longer
be compulsory.

Then again, as a matter of fact, the term ‘*rahasya*,’ ‘*esoteric
treatise*,’ is not ordinarily known as denoting the ‘explanation of the
meaning of Vedic texts.’

From all this it is clear that the purpose of adding the term
‘*rahasya*’ is as explained before.

Or, the separate mention of the ‘*Upaniṣads*,’ may be explained as
indicating the importance of that part of the Veda.

As regards the declaration quoted above—‘he is called Preceptor who
explains the meaning of mantras,’—this is not a *Smṛti* (and hence not
authoritative). Nor is there any ground for taking the term ‘*mantra*’
as standing for *Vedic texts* in general.

For all these reasons it is dear that the purpose of the present
Injunction lies in the reading of the mere Text. So that when the boy
has accomplished the getting up of the words of the Veda, this also
means that he has carried out the injunction of ‘becoming a
Teacher.’—(140)


