+++
title = "144 य आवृणोत्य्"

+++
‘*He who fills both ears with the Veda*’—by teaching—‘*should be
regarded as his Father and Mother*.’

The present verse does not enjoin that the words ‘Father’ and ‘Mother’
denote the teacher; because these two terms, ‘Father and Mother,’ have
their denotations as well known as the words ‘Ācārya’ and the rest,—that
the term ‘Father’ denotes the *progenitor*, and ‘mother’ the
*progenitress*. As a matter of fact, these two terms have been applied
here for the purpose of indirectly eulogising the Teacher; just as in
such expressions as ‘the ploughman is an ox.’ Inordinary experience the
father and the mother are known as one’s best benefactors; they give one
birth, bring him up with food, and seek to do good to their child, even
at the risk of their body. Hence, the Teacher also, being a great
benefactor, is eulogised as being equal to them; the sense being that he
who helps one by imparting learning is superior to all other
benefactors.

‘*Rightly*’—is an adverb; the sense being that the Veda imparted is
*right*, correct; not vitiated either by the omission of letters or by
wrong accent.

‘*Harm*’ stands for *injury*, and also for *disrespect*.

‘*At any time*’—*i.e*., even after the learning of books has been
accomplished, one should do him no harm. Says the author of the
*Nirukta*—‘ The Brāhmaṇas who, after being taught, do not honour their
teachers, by word, mind and act, etc., etc.’;—‘*Do not honour*,’ *i.e*.,
disregard;—‘Just as such pupils are of no use to the teacher’—bring him
no benefit—‘so also does the learning bring no benefit to the pupils.’

‘*Ātṛṇoti*’ is another reading (for ‘*āvṛṇoti*’ in the Text), which
means ‘pierces’ or ‘penetrates’ the two ears; which figuratively implies
‘teaching’; as we find in the line—‘he is called a man with
*impenetrated ears* whose ears hare not been reached by learning.’

This verse prohibits the doing of harm, by one even after he has
acquired all the learning, to all the three kinds of *Teachers*—the
Preceptor, the Sub-teacher and the Mentor.—(144)


