+++
title = "145 उपाध्यायान् दशाचार्य"

+++
This verse lays down the relative superiority among the persons intended
to be eulogised. The Preceptor is superior to the Sub-teacher, the
Father is superior to the Preceptor, and the Mother is superior even to
the Father. The specification of the numbers ‘ten’ and the rest is
purely valedictory. All that is meant is that the following is superior
to the preceding; hence it is that we have the expression ‘a thousand
Fathers.’

‘*Excels ten Sub-teachers*’—*i.e*., he is superior to ten Sub-teachers.

“Why have we the Accusative ending here?”

The ‘*ati*’ (in ‘*atiricyate*’) is a preposition; the construction
being—*upādhyāyān* *ati* (in reference to Sub-teachers);—and this means
that ‘surpassing each of the ten sub-teachers, he becomes endowed with
greater honour.’ Or, the ‘*atireka*,’ *excelling* (denoted by the verb
‘*atiricyate*’), means *excess*, the verbal root being used here in the
sense of‘subjugation caused by excess’; the sense being that ‘by excess
of respect he subdues ten sub-teachers’. Lastly, if we take the verb
‘*atiricyate*’ as the reflexive passive form, the Accusative ending
becomes quite consistent; specially as the Vārtika (on Pāṇini, 3.1.87)
speaks of ‘wide usage’ in connection with such transitive verbs as
‘milk,’ ‘cook’ and the like.

*Objection*.—“The very next verse is going to assert that the ‘Father
who imparts the Veda is the superior while the present verse declares
the Father to be superior to the Preceptor: and this is mutually
contradictory.”

There is no force in this objection. According to etymologists the
“*Ācārya*’ is not one who *teaches*; hence in the present verse the term
stands for one who only performs the sacramental rites and teaches
merely the rules of conduct;—Ācārya being one who makes one learn *ā*
*cāra*. It is not necessary that one should always use only such names
as arc current in one’s own science; *e.g*., the term ‘*guru*’ in the
present treatise, has been declared to stand for the *father*, and is
also used here and then; for the *preceptor*. From all this it is clear
that the superiority of the father here meant is only over that person
who confers upon one only a slight benefit, who only performs the
Initiatory Rite and teaches the Rules of Conduct, and does not do any
teaching.

The order of precedence being as here laid down, it follows that at a
place where all these are present, the Mother is to be saluted first,
then the Father, then the Preceptor, then the Sub-teacher.—(145)

The question arising as regards the order of precedence when the real
Preceptor, and the Father who has performed the Initiatory Rite are both
present,—the next verse supplies the answer.


