+++
title = "160 यस्य वाङ्-मनसी"

+++
That, teacher, or any person, whose ‘*speech and mind*,’ even in the
presence of disturbing causes,—‘*are pure*’—do not become
perturbed;—‘*and properly guarded*,’—*i.e*., even when perturbation has
been caused, he does not make up his mind to injure other persons, nor
does he have recourse to activity calculated to harm them: all this is
what is meant by the ‘guarding’ of speech and mind.

‘*Been*’—is added with a view to show that what is laid down applies to
each and every man, and not to the teacher only, and that also only at
the time of teaching.

‘*He obtains the whole reward*.’

The term ‘*vedānta*’ in the text stands for ‘*vedasiddhānta*,’ ‘*canons
of the Veda*’; the term ‘*siddha*’ being deleted in the same manner as
the term ‘*atyanta*’ has been held to be dropped in the term ‘*siddhe*’
as occurring in the declaration ‘*siddhe śabdārthasambandhe*, etc.’ (in
the *Mahābhāṣya*),

The term ‘*vedānta*’ therefore stands for the ‘canons’—established
doctrines—contained in the Vedic texts—wherein it lias teen
‘*recognised*’ that ‘such and such results proceed from such and such an
act’—a fact that is accepted by all persons learned in the Veda;—the
whole of such results ‘*he obtains*.’

By the present statement the author has made it clear that the proper
control of speech and mind is helpful in the ordinary life of man, as
also in sacrificial performances. For, if it were meant to he helpful
only in ordinary life, then its transgression would involve the omission
of only what is helpful to man in his ordinary life; and in that case
the transgression not causing any deficiency in any sacrificial
performance, why should not the man with unguarded speech and mind
obtain the full reward of these latter? And yet what the text says is
that ‘it is the self-controlled man that obtains the whole reward.’

Others have explained the term ‘*vedānta*’ to mean the *Esoteric
Brahmaṇas* (Upaniṣads). And by this explanation the passage means that
the man obtains the whole of that reward which consists in the
‘attaining of Brahman,’ which has been postulated, in the said esoteric
treatises, as proceeding from the performance of the compulsory duties,
and also from that of those restraints and observances which have been
laid down without reference to any rewards.

If it be asked how pan the compulsory acts be held to bring about a
result in the shape of attaining Brahman?”—our answer is simply that
such an opinion has been held by some persons.

Or again, the term ‘*redānta*’ may be explained as the ‘end’ of the
teaching ‘of the Veda’; and the result obtained is that which proceeds
from this teaching;—*i.e*., the result in the form of having fulfilled
the injunction of ‘becoming a teacher.’ By this explanation, what is
laid down in the text would become entirely subservient to the
‘injunction of teaching.’—(160)


