+++
title = "165 तपो-विशेषैर् विविधैर्"

+++
‘*By means of austerities*’—such as the Cāndrāyaṇa and the like;—‘*of
various kinds*’—of such diverse forms as eating only once, eating during
the fourth part of the day and so forth; but without injuring the body.

‘*Observances*’—such as the ‘*Upaniṣad*,’ (?) the ‘*Mahā* *nāmnikā*’ and
so forth.

‘*Prescribed by rule*’—laid down in the *Smṛtis* dealing with domestic
rites.

By means of the above, duly performed, *one should learn the entire
Veda*.

Some people have held that—“in the preceding verse the term ‘*tapas*’
stood for the duties of the Religious Student, and those same are meant
by the term *tapoviśeṣa* in the present verse.”

But this is not right; because all those are included under the term
‘*vrata*’ ‘observances.’ The term ‘*vrata*’ stands for those
restrictions that are based upon scriptures; and thus ‘*vrata*’ being a
generic term, the Mahānāmnikā and the rest also become included under
it. Hence by ‘observances’ here are meant fasting and the rest.

In connection with this verse some people have held that significance is
meant to be attached to the singular number in ‘*vedaḥ*’; and they argue
thus:—

“It is true that the affix ‘*tavya*’ (in the word ‘*adhiganta* *vyaḥ*’)
already indicates that the injunction intends the Veda to be the
predominant factor; but in view of the injunction and its
subject-matter, it is clear that the Veda is really subservient to the
‘learning of its meaning’; and the subserviency of the Veda being
accepted as meant, the proper examination of the injunction leads to the
conclusion that the function of the pupil in regard to the Veda extends
up to the learning of the meaning. The sense of the injunction thus
comes to be this—

‘By means of the Veda duly studied one should learn its meaning.’ If the
injunction did not mean this, the Veda could not be regarded as
*something to be cuff incited*; anything that is *cultivated* or
refined, is so done only as subservient to, and aiding in, something
else; and as regards the Veda, it has been already found that its use
lies in bringing about the knowledge of what is contained in it. If this
were not so, the predominance (of the Veda), even if directly expressed,
would he abandoned; just as in the case of the injunction ‘*juhoti*,’
the predominance of *saktu* is relinquished and the text is construed as
‘*saktubhiḥ*,’ (thus making the subordinate to the *Libation*). Further,
the verbal root actually used in the text denotes *understanding*:
‘*adhigamana*,’ ‘learning’ (which is what is expressed by the root in
‘*adhigantavyaḥ*’), means *knowledge*, in accordance with the dictum
that ‘all roots denoting *motion* denote *knowledge*’; and as for the
getting up of the verbal text of the Veda, this has been already laid
down before, under verse 71; so that what the present injunction does is
to lay down that the said *getting up of the text* is to be carried on
till the meaning becomes duly comprehended.

“Then again, it is just because the singular number in ‘*vedah*’ in this
passage is regarded to be significant that the injunction herein
contained is not recognised as laying down the study of several Vedas,
and hence its scope is going to be extended with a view to include such
study by what is going to be said later on, under 3.2.

“If then, there is to be a study of s *everal* Vedas, where would be the
use of significance being attached to the singular number in the present
verse?

“It is certainly of use; it serves to indicate that even by the study of
a single rescensional text one is to be regarded as having fulfilled the
injunction of ‘Vedic study,’ and that the study of several Vedas is
purely optional.

“If the study of several Vedas is not actually prescribed by injunction,
what lunatic would he there who would torture himself by the tattering
of teeth (involved in the learning of several Vedas)?

“But there *is* the other injunction—‘Having learnt the *Vedas*, etc.’
(3.2); this learning is for one who desires a particular reward, and
this reward is *Heaven*. Or, if we have some assertions made in
continuation of the said injunction, referring to ‘streams of butter’ or
some such thing,—then these may be regarded as the reward (of learning
*several* *Vedas*).

“As for the injunction of the study (of one Veda) by the Religious
Student, it pertains to the *learning of the meaning*, and serves a
perceptibly useful purpose; *e.g*., the knowledge of what the Veda says
is found to be of use in the actual performance of religious acts; and
in fact it is only the man so learned that is entitled to their
performance. The learning of *several* Vedas, on the other band, serves
a purely imperceptible purpose. If this were not so, then, the
injunction of ‘Vedic Study’ having been fulfilled by the study of a
single Veda, the assertion of ‘having studied the *Vedas*’ (3.2) would
be entirely superfluous,—if it were not an injunction of learning
several Vedas for the purpose of acquiring *merit* (an imperceptible
reward).”

Our answer to the above is as follows:—How can the view here put forward
be acceptable?—since there is the single injunction—‘the Veda should be
learnt’; and if this be regarded as not pertaining to an imperceptible
transcendental result,—on the ground (1) that it is an injunction of
sanctification, and (2) tbat it is of use only in the performance of
perceptible acts—then the same can be said in regard to the study of
several Vedas also; for the same conditions are present there also. And
further, according to the view in question, there would be a diversity
(in regard to the Veda): in one case (that of the single Veda) it would,
like the injunction of fire-laying, be related to all compulsory and
optional acts, through the comprehension of its meaning; while in the
other (that of several Vedas), it would be directly conducive to a
desirable result.

It might be argued that “the injunction of the learning of several Vedas
is a distinct injunction, and it is not based upon the injunction of
‘becoming a teacher’ (as the injunction of learning *one* Veda is); so
that it is only one who desires a particular reward that is entitled to
the former.”

But this is not right; as a matter of fact, it is not a distinct
injunction at all; there is only one injunction bearing upon the
question,—*viz*., ‘ The entire Veda should be learnt’; and what the
other passage—‘Having learnt the Vedas, etc.’ (3.2)—does is to restrict
the number of Vedas learnt to *three* only, in view of the possibility
of the idea being entertained that the singular number (in the
injunction ‘the *Veda* should be learnt’) not being meant to be
significant, one might study as many recensional texts as he
could,—five, six, even seven. Then again, in the passage under question
(3.2) we do not find the injunction in the form ‘one should learn,’ the
actual words of the injunction being ‘*O should enter the state of the
House-holder*.’

Then again, what has been said above iu regard to significance being
attached to the singular number in ‘*Vedaḥ*’ is absolutely incoherent.
Such significance should be based upon direct injunction, and not merely
upon argument and reasoning; and in the case in question what the
Injunction lays down is‘learning for the acquiring of the Vedic text,’
and the predominance of this ‘learning of the text,’ indicated by means
of the two words ending with the Accusative ending, does not cease
merely on the ground of its subserviency to the ‘comprehension of the
meaning.’ If such reasoning were accepted, significance would have to be
attached to the singular number in ‘*graham*’ (in the passage ‘*graham
sammārṣṭi*,’ ‘wash the cup,’); for the cup, even though the predominant
factor, does become subservient to the ‘washing’; but no such
subserviency is directly expressed by word,—as there is in the case of
the passage ‘*grahair-juhoti*,’ where the words directly express the
subserviency of the ‘cups’ to the ‘*Homa*.’ Thus it is clear that the
predominance of ‘Vedic Study’ is distinctly indicated by the direct
denotation (of the Accusative ending), and also by Injunction; and the
predominance being thus expressed, no significance can be attached to
the singular number.

“Well, if the purposes of the injunction of ‘Vedic Study’ are
accomplished by the getting up of a single Veda, it behoves you to point
out the use of learning several Vedas.”

This we shall explain under Chapter III.

“If the Injunction of Vedic Study extends up to the learning of the
meaning also, then, even after the text of the Veda has been got up, so
long as the meaning has not been learnt, there would be no cessation of
the performance of such Restraints and Observances as the avoiding of
honey, meat, etc.—‘What harm is there in that?’—It would be contrary to
the usage of cultured persons: cultured persons do not avoid the eating
of honey, meat, etc., after they have got up the Vedic text, even though
they continue to listen to the expounding of its meaning.”

There is no force in this objection. For there is another law which
says—‘Having learnt the Veda, one should bathe’; and here ‘having
learnt’ refers to the mere reading of the text, and ‘should bathe’
indicates the abandoning of all those Restraints and Observances that
constitute the auxiliaries to ‘Vedic Study’; for Bathing is as much
prohibited (for the Vedic Student) as Honey and Meat; so that when
Bathing is permitted by the said law, it permits the use of Honey and
the rest also, by reason of their association, and also on account of
the prohibition of all these occurring in the same context. As for
intercourse with women (which also is prohibited along with Bathing,
etc., for the Vedic Student), this forms the subject of a separate
prohibition—‘With his life of continence unperturbed, etc.’, (*Manu*,
3-2); and the transgression of this during the time that one is learning
the meaning of Vedic texts would do no violation to the Injunction of
Vedic Study; for during the said time, ‘continence’ does not form a
necessary factor of ‘study’; as all Restraints and Observances cease
after the getting up of the text. Then again, this prohibition (of
intercourse with women) is meant to fulfil some purpose for the man (and
hence not compulsory); it is for this reason that in the event of
transgression occurring in some way or the other, there is the expiation
laid down (in 11.118) for the Vedic Student commiting adultery; and what
the prescribing of this special expiation indicates is that the emission
of semen being a delinquency on the part of the person who is still
keeping the Restraints and Observances (as is clear from 11.120),—this
case would not be met by the ordinary expiatory rites of the
‘*Cāndrāyaṇa*’ and the rest, laid down in connection with ‘minor sins.’

“What are the grounds for taking the expression ‘should bathe’ as
figurative (and indicative of the discontinuance of Restraints and
Observances)?”

Our answer is as follows:—The ‘bathing’ herein laid down could not
consist of the mere washing of the body with water; for if it were so,
then what is enjoined would have to be regarded as serving some
transcendental purpose; on the other band, the Restraints imposed upon
the Vedic Student stand in need of the mention of some time at which
they could be discontinued; so that if the Injunction is taken as
indicating this limit of time, it comes to supply a much-needed
information.

“But these Restraints do not stand in need of any other limit; they are
meant to subserve the injunction of Vedic Study; so that the fulfilment
of that injunction would be their natural limit; the fulfilment of the
injunction consists in the accomplishment of its object; its object is
*study*; and the accomplishment of study is something that is easily
perceived. \[Hence there can be no point in taking the expression
‘should bathe’ as indicative of the limit of the Restraints and
Observances.\]”

This would be quite true, if the injunction of Vedic Study rested merely
on what is directly expressed by it. As a matter of fact, however, its
object embraces things not so expressed; for instance, the comprehension
of the meaning of Vedic texts resulting from the said study is also
included in the object of the said Injunction; because if it were not
so, then the Injunction would fail to be sanctiftcatory in character. In
fact, if the Injunction rested entirely in what is directly expressed by
it, it would lose its injunctive character itself; for the
*injunctiveness* of the Injunction consists in its urging the agent to
accomplish what it denotes; and ‘what it denotes’ consists of (*a*) the
result to be accomplished, (*b*) the means of accomplishing it and (*c*)
the procedure adopted; and iu as much as all these three are expressed
by a single word, none of them can be regarded as beyond what is denoted
by the Injunction. Thus then, in the injunctive verb ‘*udhīyīta*’
‘should study,’ the thing to be accomplished is what is determined by
the verbal root ‘to study,’—and the ‘procedure’ consists of the keeping
of Restraints and Observances. As a matter of fact, this injunction, by
itself, is not capable of bringing about the fulfilment of what it
denotes; because in the case of every Injunction the full accomplishment
of what it denotes is obtained through the execution of an object; and
the execution of the object of the injunction in question is already
accomplished by the force of another Injunction. For instance, for the
Teacher, there is the Injunction—

‘Having initiated the pupil, he should teach him the Veda’; and as the
work of ‘teaching’ cannot be accomplished without the work of
‘learning,’ the Teacher, with a view to the accomplishing of the
injunction of his own duty, urges the boy to the work of ‘learning’; and
it is not possible for the boy, without being urged by the Teacher, to
accomplish the act, merely on the strength of his own knowledge of the
injunction. From all this it follows that the act of ‘learning the Veda’
should be regarded as prompted by the injunction addressed to the
Teacher. And when the act is accomplished by being prompted by that
injunction, there is no need for any other injunction proscribing the
pupil’s act of ‘learning.’ Thus then, being devoid of prompting force,
what sort of injunctive character could belong to the Injunction in
question (‘the entire Veda should be learnt’)? In face of this
possibility of the Injunction losing its character, we have to look out
for some such method whereby it would acquire the requisite prompting
force. And the only sure way of doing this is to regard it as an
injunction of embellishment. Nor would the embellishment in question be
entirely useless; for it is only when the learning (of the Vedic text)
has been accomplished, that the pupil derives knowledge of some sort of
meaning, which latter knowledge becomes useful in the performance of all
those acts (that are laid down in the Veda). From this it is clearly
perceived that the Injunction in question lays down the necessity of
acquiring the knowledge of the meaning of the texts that have been
learnt in the course of ‘Vedic Study.’ Though from the very nature of
things, the meaning of the texts becomes comprehended as soon as the
texts have been heard,—yet such a comprehension is never definite and
sure. Hence the prompting done by the Injunction is towards that method
by which the said knowledge may become definitively certain. This
*certainty* comes about when one has pondered over the subject and
succeeded in setting aside all doubts; and the doing of this *pondering*
is not found to be indicated by any other means of knowledge; it is
certainly not prescribed by the injunction of ‘becoming a Teacher,’—as
this latter is accomplished by the learning (by the pupil) of the mere
verbal text. Nor is it indicated by any visible purpose to be served by
it; for what purpose of man is there which could not be fulfilled
without the said *pondering*,—and for the fulfilling of which one would
undertake it?

“Just as for one who desires to acquire landed property, the performance
of the act conducive to it is likely to be taken up by chance (or
whim),—the same might be the case with the pondering in question also.”

But in that case, there being no certainty regarding the whims and
desires of men; it is just possible that some one might not do the
pondering at all; or even if he did do it, he might not do it
immediately after the learning of the Vedic text.

Thus then, this part (of study) not being indicated by any other means,
it comes to be regarded as falling within the province of the Injunction
in question, in accordance with the principle that that alone forms the
subject-matter of an Injunction which is not got at by any other means.
Since then, (*a*) the ‘learning of the text’ is already got at by other
means,—(*b*) since the comprehension of the meaning which follows, by
the very nature of things, upon the mere reading is uncertain and
indefinite,—(*c*) since such comprehension serves no useful
purpose,—(*d*) since even after the sanctificatory learning of the text
has been accomplished, it is only the definite knowledge of its meaning
that serves the useful purpose of helping the performance of acts,—and
(*e*) since the said definite-knowledge is obtained only by means of
pondering,—it follows that it is necessary to do this *pondering* during
a well-defined time; and for the due accomplishment of this pondering,
the Injunction in question comes to be one pointing to it as its
ultimate purpose.

It is for this reason that in regard to the Restraints there arises the
doubt as to whether they arc to end with the learning of the words heard
from the mouth of the Teacher, or they are to go on with the enquiry
into the meaning of these texts, till this is definitely
ascertained,—the necessity of learning this meaning being indirectly
implied. Such being the doubt, the direction that, ‘One should bathe
after having learnt the Veda,’ serves to indicate the limit of the
observance if the said Restraints; and since the indirect indication of
this direction is equally helpful to the subject-matter in question, and
to the settling of the doubtful point, it is only right to accept the
said indication.

“Why is it said that the comprehending of the meaning is not directly
laid down? As a matter of fact, the words used are that ‘the Veda
*should be learnt*,’ which directly speaks of the said comprehension. In
the Veda as well as in other *Smṛtis*, we find such directions as
‘Learns the Veda,’ and ‘The Veda should be studied.’ And since the rule
laid down by Manu also is based upon those directions, its meaning must
be the same as that of these directions.”

The ‘learning’ spoken of in the directions (‘*tatyaḥ*’) refers to that
comprehension of meaning which is only indirectly implied. Or,
‘learning’ may stand for the getting up of the verbal text only; and the
necessity of learning the meaning would be deduced from the reasoning
expounded above. Nor is there any incongruity in the conclusion that,
though the Injunction in question is one only, yet one part of it—that
pertaining to its subject-matter—is prompted by the Injunction of
‘becoming a teacher,’ and another portion of it is prompted by itself.
Though this involves a diversity, there is nothing wrong in
this,—representing as it does, what is a mere fact.

It has been urged that “it is only right that several Vedas should be
learnt for the purpose of accomplishing a transcendental result.”

We shall answer this under 3.1.

The term ‘*veda*’ denotes that textual rescension which consists of the
collection of Mantra and Brāhmaṇa passages. But in actual usage the term
‘*veda*’ is applied to *portions* of that collection also. Hence, in
order to remove all doubts on the point, the text has added the
qualification ‘entire.’ As a matter of fact, the learning of a single
sentence cannot be regarded as fulfilling the ‘learning of the Veda,’
for the simple reason that the other sentences also are ‘Veda,’ and the
said ‘learning of the Veda’ is a sanctificatory act; just as in the case
of the ‘sacrificial cups’ \[the ‘washing’ of a *single* cup is not
regarded as fulfilling the ‘cup-washing,’ which h as been proscribed as
a sanctificatory act\]. Still, with a view to make this quite clear, the
text has added the word ‘entire.’

Others explain the term ‘entire’ as meant to include the Subsidiary
Sciences. The term ‘*veḍa*’ itself stands for the entire collection of
sentences above referred to; so that if one were to learn a single verse
less than that, he would not be regarded as having ‘learnt the Veda.’
Thus (the learning of the *whole* Veda being implied in the term ‘Veda’
itself), the addition of the epithet ‘entire’ could only be for the
purpose of including the Subsidiary Sciences. This is what h as been
declared in another *Smṛti* also—‘That the Veda along with its six
subsidiaries shall be learnt is the duty of the Brāhmaṇa.’

“All that the present verse says is that what is called ‘Veda’ should be
learnt *entire*; and certainly the Subsidiary Sciences are not called by
the name ‘Veda’; what then is there which signifies that the Veda should
be learnt *along with the Sciences*? As for the law—‘the Veda with its
six subsidiaries should be learnt,’—here we find the Subsidiary Sciences
mentioned by their own name; while in the present verse the adjective
‘entire’ qualifying the ‘Veda,’—how could the Subsidiaries be included?”

Our answer is as follows:—As a matter of fact, the present verse is
based upon the *Śruti*—‘the Veda shall be learnt’; and it has been
established that this ‘learning’ is meant to extend up to the full
comprehension of the meaning; this comprehension is not possible without
the help of the Subsidiary Sciences. It is thus that these sciences
become included by implication; and thus the learning of Elucidations,
Etymologies, Grammar and Exigetics also becomes implied by the same
Injunction. For these reasons, the inclusion of the Subsidiary Sciences
being admitted, it is only right that the term ‘entire be taken as
indicating the same fact.

The Nirukta (Etymological Explanations) and the rest are ‘*aṅgas*,’
‘parts,’ of the Veda, but not in the sense in which the hands and feet
are ‘limbs’ of man’s body, being its component parts; the Subsidiary
Sciences are not components of the Veda; in fact they are called
‘limbs,’ ‘*aṅgas*,’ of the Veda only figuratively; the sense being that
without these the Veda is not able to accomplish its purposes; and hence
they are as if they were ‘limbs’ of it. It is in view of this figurative
signification of the term ‘Veda,’ that the adjective ‘entire’ should be
explained.

‘*Along with the Esoteric treatises*.’—The Upanisads are the ‘esoteric
treatises.’ Though these also are ‘Veda’ they have been mentioned
separately, on account of their great importance.—(165)


