+++
title = "171 वेदप्रदानाद् आचार्यम्"

+++
‘*They call the teacher* “*Father*,” *on account of his imparting the*
*Veda*,’—*i.e*., On account of his teaching the entire Veda, not merely
of expounding the Sāvitrī. ‘*Imparting*’ stands for making the boy agree
to pronounce the words of the Veda.

“If it be as described here, then, until the teacher has acquired the
position of the father, the boy cannot obtain his second birth; and
until he has become ‘twice-born,’ he would be as unrestrained in his
conduct as he is prior to the Upanayana.”

In view of this difficulty the text adds—‘*before the tying of the
girdle for him*’—*no religious act*—any act, *Śrauta*, or *Smārta* or
*conventional*, for the acquiring of transcendental results,—is
performed; *i.e*., he is not entitled to perform any such act. In fact
it is only after his *Upanayana* that the boy becomes entitled to the
performance of the duties of his caste and of humanity.

“How could there be any question of the boy being entitled to the
performance of any such acts, when he is lacking in the requisite
knowledge (prior to Initiation and Vedic Study)?”

It is in view of this that it has been declared that “the pupil is to
his teacher both pupil to be taught and person to he helped in the
performance of sacrifices”; \[and while he is himself kicking in the
requisite knowledge\] he should be taught by his teacher (how to perform
the acts); as it has been said above (2.69)—‘The teacher should teach
him the rules of cleanliness and right conduct.’ Says Gautama also
(2.6)—‘The restraints begin with the Upanayana.’ The business of the
teacher extends up to the completion of Vedic Study.—(171)


