+++
title = "172 नाऽभिव्याहारयेद् ब्रह्म"

+++
The phrase ‘*till the tying of the girdle*’ has to be construed with
this verse; or the intended limit may be taken as supplied by the
commendatory statement contained in the second half—‘*so long as he is
not born in the* *Veda*.’

‘*Brahma*’—Vedic text—‘*he should not pronounce*.’ This is an
instruction to the father of the boy; the sense being that he should
guard the child from pronouncing Vedic texts in the same manner as ho
guards him from the drinking of wine and such other acts.

Some people interpret this prohibition of pronouncing Vedic texts to
indicate the propriety of learning the Subsidiary Sciences before
*Upanayana*. They further explain the causal affix (in
‘*abhivyāhārayet*’) to mean that the child should not be made by his
father to pronouce Vedic texts, there is no harm done if the child
himself pronounces a few indistinct words of the Veda.’

But this is not right; as we read in another *Smṛti*—‘He should not
*pronounce* Vedic texts’ (Gautama, 2.5). And in the following
commendatory statement also it is stated that ‘*he is equal to a
Śūdra,'* which means that the child pronouncing Vedic texts is just as
reprehensible as the Śūdra.

The term ‘*svadhā*’ stands for the food offered to Pitṛs; or, the term
may stand for the ‘rites performed in honour of Pitṛs’.; and the term
‘*svadhāninayana'* means ‘that mantra by means of which the said food is
offered or given’; *e.g*., such mantras as ‘*śundhantām pitaraḥ*’ and so
forth. With the exception of such mantras, the boy should not pronounce
any Vedic texts.

It is from this that we deduce the fact that the uninitiated boy should
offer to his father libations of water, the ‘*nava-śrāddha*’; etc. That
he is not entitled to the *Pārvana* and other *śrāddhas* follows from
the fact of his still being without the ‘Fire.’ These latter shall be
described under the section on ‘*Piṇḍānrāhāryaka* (?).’ We shall explain
all this in full detail in *Adhyāya III*.—(172)


