+++
title = "176 नित्यं स्नात्वा"

+++
Everyday, ‘*having bathed and become pure*,’—*i.e*., having his
uncleanliness removed by bath,—‘*he should make offerings to Deities,
Sages and Fathers*.’ If he is already clean, he need not bathe; as the
adding of the term ‘clean’ clearly shows that the ‘bathing’ here laid
down is only for the purpose of cleanliness, and hence its performance
is absolutely compulsory, like the ‘bathing’ to be done by the
*Snālaka*, Accomplished Student. It is for this reason that in another
*Smṛti* bathing has been prohibited (for the Religious Student); though
this prohibition refers to bathing with clay, for purposes of personal
adornment. Gautama however has prescribed actual bathing. Hence what is
meant is that one should plunge into water like a stick, and he should
remove dirt, etc., by rubbing the body with his hauds. Unless there is
touching of an unolean thing, such dirt as arises from perspiration, or
from contact with the dust contained in the clothing, etc., does not
make one ‘unclean’; for the presence of such dirt is inevitable. Says
the Brāhmaṇa—‘What is *dirt*? Is it the skin, or hairs of the beard or
penance?’—which shows that the presence of such ‘dirt’ is conducive to
spiritual merit.

“How is it known that the *bathing* (here laid down) is for the purposes
of cleanliness?”

The present injunction cannot be taken as prompting, to the performance
of divine service, a person who fulfills the two distinct qualifications
of ‘having bathed’ and ‘become clean’;

\(1\) because as a matter of fact, one who has bathed can never remain
unclean;

\(2\) because even for a person who has adopted cleanliness by having
sipped water, etc., bathing is found to be enjoined;

\(3\) because we meet with such passages as ‘having bathed, sipped
water, one should sip water again,’ where even for the person who has
bathed a method of further cleanliness is enjoined.

From all this it is clear that what the present verse enjoins is that
whenever occasion (in the shape of the contact of unclean things, etc.)
arises, one should bathe, even though there be already present the
‘cleanliness’ that is generally understood as such.

Or, the present verse may be regarded as a totally independent rule,
intended to prohibit bathing without special occasion arising in the
shape of uncleanliness; and it is iu view of this, prohibition that we
have the counter-exception—‘one should bathe after having learnt the
Veda,’—which enjoins bathing at the end of Vedic Study (even in the
absence of any uncleanlincss).

“*He should make offerings to Deities*, *Sages and Fathers*.”—By reason
of the mention of ‘*tarpaṇa*,’ the ‘offering’ here meant appears to be
that offering of water to the Deities and others which has been
prescribed among the duties of the house-holder, under 3.283. The
authors of *Gṛhyasūtras* also have declared this act as to be done, with
water only; *e.g*., says Āśvalāyana (3.1.3)—‘He satisfies the Deities.’
Inordinary life also this act is known as the ‘offering of water.’

The Deities to whom this offering is to be made have been enumerated by
the writers on Gṛhya—*vis*., Agni, Prajāpati, Brahmā and so forth. The
‘*tarpaṇa*,’ ‘offering,’ to these does not consist of producing in them
the feeling of satisfaction (which is the etymological meaning of the
term ‘*tarpaṇa*’); it consists only in the pouring, on their behalf, of
water with joined hands. Hence what is here laid down comes to be only a
sacrificial offering, in which water is the substance offered. Specially
as the character of ‘deity’ could not otherwise have belonged to those
to whom the offering is made; for that alone has been called ‘deity’ to
whom a sacrifice is offered; it is not one who *becomes satisfied*. The
only definition of ‘deity’ that we have is—‘Deities are recipients of
hymns and recipients of offerings’; they become ‘recipients of hymns’ by
becoming the objects of eulogy, and they become ‘recipients of
offerings’ by becoming those to whom offerings are made. When therefore
our author speaks of them as ‘*tarpya*,’ ‘to be satisfied,’ he uses the
term in its figurative sense of ‘being recipients of the offering of
water.’ The teacher and such other persons are recognised as
‘recipients’ when the cow and such things are transferred to their
ownership; and the Deities also are ‘recipients.’ Thus both having the
common character of ‘being recipients,’ they are described as ‘being
satisfied.’ If what is laid down here meant actual ‘satisfying’ of the
Deities, then this^(:) water-offering’ would become a purely
sanctificatory act; and yet no ‘Sanctification’ is possible in the case
of Deities; for the simple reason that they have not been, nor are they
ever likely to lie, employed; and what has never been employed, or is
not likely to be employed, cannot rightly be regarded as an object of
sanctification.

‘*Sages*,’—*i.e*., those sages that happen to be one’s ‘*Gotra-ṛṣis*’;
*e.g*., for those belonging to the ‘Parāśara-gotra,’ Vaśiṣṭha, Śakti and
Pārāśarya would be the ‘sages’ (to whom the offering is to be made). The
author of *Gṛhyasūtras* have however spoken of the ‘seers of Vedic
Mantras’ (and not the *Gotra-ṛṣis*) as the ‘sages’ to whom the offering
is to be made; *i.e*., the sages Madhucchandas, Gṛtsamada and
Viśvāmitra. Since the text speaks of ‘sages’ without any qualification,
it is open to us to take it as standing for both kinds of sages; but in
view of the fact that the Gṛhyasūtras have specified them (as being the
‘seers of mantras’), it is only right to take these latter as meant.

‘*Fathers*.’—One’s dead ancestors,—father, grandfather, etc., all
*Sapiṇḍas* and *Samānodakas*. In the case of the ‘Fathers,’ the
‘offering’ is to be the actual ‘*Tarpaṇa*’ itself. This is going to be
distinctly laid down under the rules bearing upon *Śrāddha*.

*Worshiping of the Deities*.—In connection with this some ancient
writers have made the following observations:—“Who are these deities,
whose ‘worship’ is here laid down? If they are meant to be those pninted
in picture-books—figures with four arms, with a thunderbolt in the hand
and so forth,—then, since ordinary men regard these as ‘images’ (which
connotes *unreality*), they can be called ‘Deity,’ only figuratively.
If, on the other hand, they are meant to be those related to hymns and
offerings,—which are indicated by Vedic injunctions, and also by the
words of mantras, and which are called so by persons versed in the use
of words and their denotations,—such as ‘Agni,’ ‘Agni-Soma,’
‘Mitra-Varuṇa,’ ‘Indra,’ ‘Viṣṇu,’ and so forth—then, in that case, their
character of ‘Deity,’ would be dependent upon the said acts (of
offering, etc.), and not upon the fact of their having any connection
with the denotation (of the term ‘Deity’); and further, a particular
(Deity) would be the ‘Deity’ for only that offering which is enjoined as
to be offered to him; *e.g*., when the ‘Cake baked upon eight pans,’ is
called ‘*āgneya*’ (dedicated to Agni), Agni becomes the ‘deity’ only of
that cake, and not of that which is called ‘*saurya*’ (dedicated to
Sūrya).”

From the above considerations the conclusion that the ancient writers
have deduced is as follows:—In cases where the term cannot be. taken in
its direct denotation, it is only right to take it in the figurative
sense; specially as such is the actual usage. Hence the ‘worship’
enjoined in the present verse is that of *images*.

What the truth on this point is we shall explain below, under verse 189.

‘*Placing of fuel*’—throwing into the fire pieces of wood, every morning
and evening.—(176)


