+++
title = "182 उदकुम्भं सुमनसो"

+++
He should fetch as much of water in jars and other things as might serve
the purposes of the Teacher.

This is only by way of illustration; the meaning being that he should do
other household-work also,—all that is not absolutely demeaning. What
this verse is meant to indicate is that the pupil should not be made to
do any demeaning work,—such as touching the utensils in which food has
been eaten by persons other than the Teacher himself. For as regards the
Teacher himself, his service has been already prescribed in a general
way.

The compound ‘*yāvadarthāni*’ is to be expounded as ‘*yāvān arthaḥ
eṣām*.’

‘*Day by day he should beg for alms*’;—‘alms’ here stands for a very
small quantity of *cooked*, just enough for sustenance. It would not be
right to argue that it stands for *food in general* (not necessarily
*cooked*); since the generic term ‘*anna*’ (food) is found to be used in
the prohibition coming later on (in 188) regarding ‘the *food* of one
person’; because in view of the injunction ‘having collected the alms,
he should present it to the Teacher and then eat it,’ where the
*bringing* and *eating* are mentioned together, it is clear that
*cooked* food is meant; if dry grains had been brought in, how could
they be eaten forthwith? If the grain were collected and then cooked in
the Teacher’s house, the food thus cooked would be one that has the
*alms* for its source, it would not be the *aims* itself. In common
usage also it is *cooked food* that is called ‘alms.’

‘*Day by day*.’—“The daily *begging for alms* is already implied in what
follows later on (in 188)—‘He should live every day on alms.’

In 188, the term ‘every day’ has been added for the purpose of laying
down the means of subsistence; while the term ‘day by day’ in the
present verse is meant to preclude the possibility of some one keeping
the food mixed with butter, etc., overnight and then eating it next day;
the sense being that he should beg for alms and eat it *day by day*; and
he should never beg on one day and then, having kept it over-night, eat
it next day after mixing it with butter, etc—(182)

The Author next mentions the persons from whom the alms are to be
begged.


