+++
title = "187 अकृत्वा भैक्षचरणम्"

+++
‘*He who, for seven days*’—consecutively, ‘*has omitted to beg alms and
to offer fuel to the Fire,—without being ill*’—while not suffering from
any disease,—‘*shall perform the rites prescribed for the
Anakīrṇin*’;—*i.e*., the expiatory rite the exact form of which is going
to he described in Chap. 11?. (verse 118).

This is said here only for the purpose of showing the gravity of the
offence; and it does not mean that the rite mentioned is to he actually
performed in expiation of the omission. That this is so is shown by the
fact that another *Smṛti* has laid down a much simpler expiation for
this omission, *viz*.: ‘offering of clarified butter, etc.’ The
following fact also is another indicative of the same conclusion:—If
what is mentioned here were a real expiatory rite, then on the occasion
of mentioning the conditions under which the ‘*Amkīrṇin-rite*’ are to be
performed as an expiatory rite, the author would have mentioned these
omissions also, in the same way in which he has mentioned ‘sexual
intercourse with women.’

Some people interpret this verse to means as follows:—“It is necessary
to do the two acts (of begging alms and offering fuel) for seven days
only; having done them for seven days, if one drops them, there is no
harm in this; and these seven days are to be the first ones after
Upanayana.”

This however is not right; as it would lie in direct contravention to
the direction that ‘this should be done till the Final Return from the
teacher’s house,’—as also to what follows in the next verse.—(187)


