+++
title = "188 भैक्षेण वर्तयेन्"

+++
*Objection*.—“It has already been laid down that he should go about
begging alms every day (183).”

What is there said would show that the begging of Alms is meant to serve
the visible purpose (of sustaining the body); specially as it has been
subsequently laid down that ‘having offered it to the Teacher, he should
eat it’; and this ‘*eating*’ cannot be sanctificatory of the alms; which
alone could prevent us from taking it as serving the purely visible
purpose of sustaining the body.

Some people have explained that the re-iteration of the ‘daily begging
of alms’ is made for the purpose of adding the further direction that
‘he should not eat the food given by one person.’

But this is not right. Since the eating of the food given by one person
is precluded by the term ‘alms’ itself. ‘Alms’ stands for *an aggregate
of what is obtained* *by* *begging*; whence then could there be any
possibility of eating the food given by one person?

The conclusion on this point is that the whole rule has been re-iterated
here with a view to adding (in the next verse) that such eating of the
food given by one person is permissible at *Śrāddhas*.

‘*He should subsist on alms*’;—he should nourish his body—sustain his
life—by means of food obtained by begging; and he should not eat food
received from a single person.

The verse should not be taken to mean that “he should not eat what
belongs to a single person,—he should eat what belongs to several
owners; *e.g*., what belongs to several undivided brothers.” For the
word in the text means simply ‘one who eats one food—or one person’s
food.’

The term ‘*Vrati*’ here stands for the Religious Student; and as the
fact of the rule pertaining to him is clear from the context, the
addition of the word can be taken only as filing up the metre.

Next follows the commendatory statement:—‘The subsisting—sustaining of
the body—of the student on alms only has been declared to be equal to
fasting.’—(188)


