+++
title = "189 व्रतवद् देव-दैवत्ये"

+++
This verse provides an exception, under certain conditions, to the rules
regarding subsisting on alms.

‘*In honour of Gods*’;—*i.e*., when Brāhmaṇas are fed in honour of the
gods; and also when they are fed in honour of the fathers;—if he is
‘*incited*,’ requested—‘*he may eat freely*’—the food given by one
person. But he himself should not ask for it.

This again should be ‘*in due accordance with his observances*’; *i.e*.,
he should avoid honey and meat, which are inconsistent with his
observances. The two phrases—‘in *due accordance with his observances*’
and ‘*like an ascetic*’—express the same meaning; and it does not mean
that in a village he is to eat ‘in accordance with his observances,’
while in the forest he is to eat ‘like an ascetic.’ It is with a view to
filling up the metre that the two phrases have been used. \[There is
another reason why the phrase ‘*like an ascetic*’ should not he taken
separately\]—‘Ascetic’ here stands for the *hermit*, so if the student
were permitted to eat ‘like the hermit,’ the eating of meat also would
become allowed for him; as the hermit is permitted to eat meat, by such
rules as ‘he may eat the flesh of dead animals’ (Gautama, 3.31).

‘*In honour of Gods*’;—*i.e*., those rites of which gods are the
deities; *i.e*., the feeding of Brāhmaṇas laid down as to be done at the
performance of the *Agnihotra*, the *Darśa-Pūrṇamāsa* and the other
sacrifices offered to the gods; as we find in such injunctions as ‘at
the Āgrahāyaṇa and other sacrifices one should feed Brāhmaṇas and make
them pronounce “*svasti*.”’ It is in connection with these that we have
the present permission for the religious student.

Others explain the term ‘*performance in honour of the gods*’ to mean
that feeding of Brāhmaṇas which is done in honour of the Sun-god on the
seventh day of the month, and so forth.

This however is not right. For the act of *eating* has no connection
with the gods,—being, as it is, not instrumental in the accomplishment
of any sacrifice. Further, the mere fact of an act being done with
reference to a god, does not make the latter the ‘deity’ of that act; if
it did, then the Teacher would have to be regarded as the ‘deity’ when
one gives a cow to him, and the room will have to be regarded as the
‘deity’ when one sweeps it. Then again, it is with the *eater* that the
act of *eating* is directly connected; and the Sun-god has no active
function in the fulfilment of that act (as the Teacher is in the former
case); nor is he the thing aimed at (as the room is in the latter case);
as the eating is not for his sake. Further, the accusative ending (in
the term denoting *food*) denotes that it is meant for the eater, not
that it is meant for the Sun-god. Nor has it been enjoined anywhere that
‘one should feed Brāhmaṇas for the sake of (with reference to) the
Sun-god.’

It might be argued that on the basis of usage we assume the existence of
such an injunction.

But this cannot be; because there is always some scriptural basis found
for such assumption of injunctions.

“In the present case also we have such basis in the shape of the
‘external’ *Smṛtis*.”

If there were such a Smṛti-rule, its meaning would be that ‘one should
please the gods by feeding Brāhmaṇas.’ And it would not be right to
assume such a meaning; as scriptural injunctions are aimed, not at
*pleasin the Gods*, but at accomplishing what is prescribed by the
injunctions. Then again, if such were the meaning of the Injunction, its
connection with the Sun-god and others intended to be deities could not
be based either upon an object, or upon a desired result; nor again
could they be the purpose, as in the case of the act of piercing; nor
are they desired for their own sake, like cattle and other desirable
things, for the simple reason that they are not something to be enjoyed.
If it were the *satisfaction* of the Sun-god that were desired,—that
also, will need a proof for its own existence; and there is no such
proof available. Such a thing as the ‘satisfaction of the Sun-god’ is
not known by Perception or other means of knowledge,—in the way that
cattle, etc., are,—whereby it could be desired and connected with the
performance of sacrifices.

If the motive of the man be held to be the idea that “the Sun-god is my
lord and he will endow me with a fruit desired by me”;—this also cannot
be accepted, as there is no proof for this either. There is no
Injunction in support of this idea. It is only an Injunction that
prompts to activity the person who is related to a certain well-known
result, which also serves to single out the man so prompted; but it does
not point to the presence of the result. What the Injunction points to
is the fact that a certain act known by other means of knowledge as
leading to a particular desirable result is related to the performance
as his qualifying factor.

If it be held that the offering is a kind of ‘sacrifice,’ and the
*feeding* is a kind of *disposal* of it,—our answer is that that may be
so regarded, if such is the usage of cultured people. But the feeding
cannot be shown to have any direct connection with the deity; and as for
connection through the intervening agency of the *sacrife*, that we do
not object to. Then again, as a matter of fact, when people undertake
the performance of such acts, they have no idea that they are performing
a *sacrifice*; the only idea that they have is that when the Brāhmaṇas
have been fed, the particular deity would be satisfied. From all this it
is clear that the Deity has no sort of action conducive to the act of
feeding, nor is it the qualifying factor of any other thing that has
such action. Thus then, the Deity is neither the object of the act, nor
has it any connection with it. Nor again is it possible for the Sun-god
and the rest to be regarded ns *aimed at* by the act; for in the act of
*feeding*, it is the person *fed* that is aimed at; and it is the
Brāhmaṇas that are fed. Further, the mere fact of being *aimed at* does
not make one the ‘deity’; for in that case, when one gives a cow to the
Teacher, or sweeps the room, the Teacher and the room would have to be
regarded as ‘deities.’

“How then is there to be Brāhmaṇa-feeding at a performance in honour of
ancestors? There also the fathers could not be the ‘deities’ of the act.
The offerings made into the Fire could not be regarded as made in honour
of the ancestor; as other deities are found to be mentioned in
connection with them. And just as the ‘satisfaction of the Sun-god,’ so
the ‘satisfaction of ancestors also, cannot be regarded as the result to
be accomplished, by the act; for the very same reason that the
connection of such satisfaction with the Injunction is not cognisable by
any other means of knowledge.”

To this some people make the following answer:—The ‘satisfaction of
Ancestors’ is clearly recognised (as the result to be accomplished).
That such beings as the ‘Fathers’ do exist is proved by the fact of
souls being imperishable; and it is only through their deeds that they
become connected with physical bodies. The feeding of these ‘Ancestors’
is the principal business, of which the reward has been described in the
passage—‘feeding them, one obtains ample reward.’ This reward could only
consist in the satisfaction of the Ancestors; this ‘satisfaction’ again
could only be in the form of happiness, mental contentment; it could not
be in the form of physical gratification which follows, in the case of
men, from the act of *eating*. This pleasure may sometimes accrue to the
fathers during the different conditions of life in which they happen to
be born under the influence of their own past deeds. The verbal root
‘*tṛp*’ denotes only *satisfaction*; physical gratification is something
different, and can be known only by other means of knowledge.

Against this the following objection might be raised:—“In as much as the
Son is the nominative agent in the act of feeding, how could the result,
which should accrue to the agent, accrue to the Ancestors,—as people
versed in law do not regard actions as bringing rewards to persons other
than the actual doers.”

Such an objection cannot be rightly taken. Because in this case the
Ancestors themselves are the accredited agents; by the mere act of
begetting the child, the father has done all this (that the son does on
his behalf); in fact the son is begot for the sole purpose that he will
confer on the Father benefits, seen as well as unseen. Tims then, just
as in the *Sarvasvāra* sacrifice—where the performer offers his own life
and is thus absent when the subsequent details are performed,—some other
persons continue to be regarded as the ‘performer,’ by virtue of his
having died after having requested the Brāhmaṇas to finish the sacrifice
for him, by means of the words

‘O Brāhmaṇas, please finish the sacrifice for me’;—so would it also be
in the case in question. The only difference between the two cases is
tbat in the case of the *Sarvasvāra*, the actual doers are the hired
priests doing the act with the totally different motive of earning a
living, while in the case in question the doer is the son, who has been
prompted by tbat same Injunction. Just as the Father performs the
sacraments *for his son*, being prompted to it by the Injunction of
*begetting sons*, which Injunction extends up to the final admonition
addressed to the son (after Upanayana),—similarly the *Śrāddha* and
other rites are performed, *for the father* by the son. Just as the
maintaining of the living father is a necessary duty of the son, as laid
down in (11.10A), so is it with the dead father also.

The performance of the act in question is not purely voluntary, like the
*Vaiśvānara* sacrifice, in connection with which we read—‘On the birth
of a son, one should offer the Vaiśvānara cake baked on twelve pans;—he
upon whose birth this offering is made becomes glorious, an enjoyer of
food and endowed with efficient organs.’ Here we find that the Father
comes to perform the Yaiśvānara sacrifice when he desires certain
results for his son; and it is not compulsory, like the Tonsure and
other sacramental rites. As regards the act under consideration, on the
other hand, we have the direction that ‘the rite in honour of the
Fathers should he performed till one’s death,’ which shows that the rite
is to be performed throughout one’s life.

As regards the objection that the result of the act, according to this
view, does not accrue to the doer of the act,—this is explained in a
different manner: just as in the case of the Vaiśvānara sacrifice, the
result, in the shape of having a highly qualified son, accrues to the
father, who is the doer of the act,—so in the case in question also, the
result, in the shape of the ‘Father’s satisfaction,’ accrues to the son,
the doer of the act. So that in both ways—whether the result accrue to
the father or to the performer of the rite,—there is no incongruity at
all. For as regards the father also, a result like the one in question
is one that is desired by him in the very act of begetting the child; so
that the father also does not obtain a reward not desired by him.

“If the ancestors are not the ‘deities’ of the Śrāddha-rite, how can it
be called ‘*paitra*’ (in honour of ancestors), which term has been
formed by the adding of the affix denoting the *deity*?’”

What we say in answer to this is that the Fathers are regarded as
deities on the ground of their being, like deities, the entities with
reference to whom the offerings are made. The ancestors are referred to
in some such form as ‘this feeding of Brāhmaṇas is done for the purpose
of benefiting you.’ In the offering called the ‘*Piṇḍapitṝ-Yajña*,’ the
ancestors are actually ‘deities but of *śrāddhas*, the ancestors have
not been regarded as ‘deities.’ As for this feeding of Brāhmaṇas, it is
on the same footing as the offerings tbat are made into the fire of
portions of clarified butter, cake and such other things. And in this
way the Brāhmaṇas themselves occupy the position of ancestors. Hence at
the time that the food is served to them, one should think of it being
offered to his ancestors, with some such expression in his mind—‘this is
offered to you, it is no longer mine.’ The Brāhmaṇas thus fed attain the
position of the ‘*Āhavanīya* fire’ (into which libations are poured);
the only difference being that into the Āhavanīya the offering is
actually thrown, while it is only placed near the Brāhmaṇas, and they
take it up themselves.

Nor will it be right to argue that “*Śrāddhas* cannot be regarded as
*sacrifice*, as in them the syllable ‘*svāhā*’ is not pronounced with
reference to the gods.” Because we find the same in the case of the
‘*Sviṣṭakṛt*’ offerings (which are regarded as sacrifice). Thus then,
the *Śrādḍha*, even though of the nature of a ‘sacrifice,’ can be
offered to Ancestors. Nor is there any incongruity in the Ancestors
being the ‘deities’ (of the offering) and also the recipients of the
result. We are going to explain more about this matter, which is not
directly mentioned in the text, under Chapter III.

From all this it becomes established that the Sun and the other gods arc
not ‘deities’ in the feeding of Brāhmaṇas.

“The definition of ‘deity’ as *one who is aimed at in a sacrifice* is
too narrow; because as a matter of fact, we find the name ‘deity’
applied even in cases where there is no connection with any sacrifice;
*e.g*., in such statements as—(*a*) ‘the worshipping of deities,’ ‘one
should approach the deities.’ But neither *worship*, nor *going forward*
(which is what is expressed by *approaching*), is possible with regard
to deities.”

There is no force in this; as the *worship* may be taken as enjoined in
connection with those cases where the deity is actually enjoined; or, it
may refer to the deities as related to the Agnihotra and other
sacrifices.

“Even so, the difficulty does not cease. The deity can never be the
*object of worship*; as that would deprive it of the very character of
‘Deity’ (which has been defined as consisting in being *aimed at in a
sacrifice*); for if it were the *object of worship*, it could not be the
*recipient of the sacrifice*. It h as been declared that ‘the active
agent of one act cannot be an active agent of another.’ The ‘active
agent’ is a particular kind of force, and this force varies with each
particular act; and as the presence of such force can be indicated only
by its effects, we can reasonably assume only that much of diversity in
it as there may be effects. From this it follows that what is the
‘recipient of a gift’ must remain the *recipient*, it cannot become the
*object*.—‘How then do we have such expressions as *give this to the
cooker*, where the *nominative* of the action of *cooking* becomes the
*recipient*,—or *having his body wounded by arrows, he went away
helplessly, being looked upon by the glances of his beloved*, \[where
the *object* of the act of *looking* becomes the *nominative* of the act
of *going* \].’—The answer to this has already been explained:—such
expressions become justified by the difference between the *efficiency*
and the *efficient* being regarded as secondary and figurative; as is
found to be the case in such expressions as ‘having eaten, he goes.’
Thus then, if the aot in question is meant to be a *worship*, then its
object cannot have the character of the ‘Deity’; while if the Sun and
the rest are ‘deities,’ then the act enjoined cannot be regarded as
‘worship.’ Nor can it be held that the Sun being well known as a
‘deity,’ the present injunction lays down its *worship*. Because the
term ‘deity’ is not a common name of the Sun and other gods, in the way
in which the term ‘*go*’ (cow) is of the ‘*śabaleya*’ and other bovine
varieties.”

To the above we make the following reply:—It is quite true that the Sun
and others are not, in their own form, ‘deities’; the term ‘deity’ is a
relative term; and it is only from an injunction that we can learn that
a certain being is the ‘deity’ of an act; the fact being that when a
certain offering is enjoined with reference to a being, this latter is
the ‘deity’ of that offering. It is for this reason that Agni is not the
‘deity’ of any other offering save that ‘dedicated to Agni.’ \[All this
is quite true\] but no injunction of ‘worship’ is possible without the
object to be worshipped; and deities are found to be mentioned as
objects of worship. Now if the act of ‘worship’ is not possible when the
term ‘deity’ is taken in its primary sense, then the ‘worship’ may be
taken as being of the nature of ‘sacrifice.’ But, in the absence of any
mention (in the injunction of feeding Brāhmaṇas) of the substance to be
offered and the deity to whom it is to be offered, the act in question
cannot acquire the character of true ‘sacrifice’; so that the text iu
question may be regarded as a descriptive reference for the purpose of
prescribing the ‘forenoon’ as the proper time for it; the sense being
that ‘all acts in honour of the gods should be done during the
forenoon.’

“Why is it said that the deity is not directly mentioned?”

For the simple reason that there is no word directly signifying any
deity. The term ‘deity’ that is actually found is the common name of all
deities; so that the injunction refers to the worshipping of Agni,
Āditya, Rudra, Indra, Viṣṇu, Sarasvatī and so forth; and during the
*worship* there is offering of incense, light, garland, presents and
such other things. In the case of Agni; the connection with the act of
worship offered is always direct; as regards Āditya (the Sun-god) since
he is far off, his worship consists in the placing of sandal-paste,
flowers, etc., on a clean spot; and as regards Indra and the other gods,
since they are not visible, their worshipping is done by the placing of
flower, etc., accompanied by a reference to their names. Though in the
act of worship, the beings worshipped form the predominant factor, yet
inasmuch as they are subservient to the act to be done, it is the act of
worship that comes to be recognised as what should be done. If the
substance offered were the predominant factor, then the Deity could
never form the subject of the injunction. All this is made clear in
Jaimim’s Mīmānsā-Sūtra, 2.1.6 and 7. The view put forward on the other
hand is perfectly reasonable, the case being analogous to that of the
Hymns and Eulogies. The Hymn is not made for the sake of the hymn
itself; so the *worship* also is not for the sake of the *worshipped*.
If might be argued that Hymns and Eulogies are not mentioned here by
name. But the answer to this has already been given. The accusative has
the sense of the instrumental, as in the expression ‘*juhoti*,’ where
‘*saktūn*’ has been taken as ‘*saktubhiḥ*.’

Similarly the sentence ‘*mṛdam gām daivatam pradakṣiṇāni kurvīta*,’—‘one
should have the clay, the cow, the deity to his right,’—lays down the
use of the right hand; the sense being that all acts done in honour of
the gods should be done with the right hand; the passage cannot mean
that the deities ensouling the clay, etc., should be actually placed on
the right; for the simple reason that the deities have no physical form.

The same holds good regarding the injunction ‘one should move up to the
gods.’ Since it is not possible for one to go near the gods by walking
on foot, and since the root ‘*gam*’ (as in ‘*abhigāccet*’) signifies
*knowledge*, why should ‘*abhigamana*’ differ from *Remembrance*? The
sense thus is that during the act one should think of the gods; *i.e*.,
he should avoid all anxiety or distraction of the mind. In this way this
*Smrti* is found to be one whose basis is actually found in the Vedic
Injunction, which says—‘One should think in his mind of that deity to
whom he may be offering the libation.’

“But this *thinking* of the deity is already implied in the *aiming*
(which has been put forward in the definition of the Deity),—which
cannot be done without *thinking*.”

This objection has no force; as mere *aiming* can be done also by a man
who is anxious and whose mind is distracted.

Thus then all suoḥ expressions as ‘the property of the gods,’ ‘the
cattle of the gods,’ ‘the substance of the gods’ and the like are to be
taken as referring to such cattle and things as hare been assigned to
(dedicated to) the gods. Some people have held that in the seotion
dealing with penalties to be inflicted upon persons stealing the
‘property of gods,’ it is the image of the god that is meant; as
otherwise the regulations bearing upon the subject would become liable
to he infringed. As regards the images upon whom the character of ‘gods’
has been imposed, things are called their ‘property’ on the basis of an
assumed sense of ownership; and it is such property that is referred to
as ‘property of the gods,’ in such passages as—‘the highest penalty is
to be inflicted on the stealing of the property of Gods, Brāhmaṇas and
Kings.’ In reality, gods can have no rights of ownership; and hence the
literal sense of the expression being inadmissible, it is only right
that we should accept the figurative one.

“In the present case what is the figurative sense? In every instance of
figurative use, the presenoe of a common function (or quality) forms the
basis; *e.g*., the expression ‘the Boy is Fire’ is used when the boy is
found to possess the white resplendence of fire. Similarly in every case
the figurative or secondary sense is recognised only where there is some
common property present;—the presence of suoḥ property being cognised by
means of perception and other means of cognition. In the case in
question however, since the sense of the *deity* is recognisable only by
the purpose served by it,—and the form of the deity cannot be
ascertained through that purpose,—how could there be any recognition of
common properties?”

Our answer is as follows:—We find particular forms of deities described
in the Mantras and Arthavādas; and all these descriptions are
interpreted as figurative. People who do not perceive any basis for such
interpretation take the passages in their literal sense and regard Indra
and the deities as actually possessing those forms; and the similarity
of such forms they actually perceive in the images; and in this sense
also it is only natural that the description should he regarded as
figurative.

Some people have explained that the feeding of Brāhmaṇas at *Śrāddha* in
honour of the Viśvedevas is what is described here as being ‘in honour
of the gods.’ But such feeding, being part of what is done ‘in honour of
ancestors,’ becomes included under the latter phrase, and the
re-iteration of it would he entirely meaningless. Then again, since we
have the generic term ‘gods,’ on what grounds could we restrict it to
the *Viśvedevas* only P If such restriction be based upon the
association of the term ‘*pitrya*’ ‘in honour of ancestors,’—then, since
the acts thus spoken of would not he included in ‘those done in honour
of ancestors,’—the two words could he justified on the analogy of the
expression ‘*go-balibarda*,’ ‘bovine bull,’ which is used even when
there is not much difference between what is denoted by the two
terms.—(189)


