+++
title = "190 ब्राह्मणस्यैव कर्मैतद्"

+++
The duty—tbat one should eat the food given by one person only under
certain circumstances—that has just been prescribed, is meant for the
Brāhmaṇa only;—it has been so ordained ‘*by the sages*’—by the learned,
after having learnt it from the Veda. They do not intend this to apply
to the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya; which means that students belonging to
these two castes should not eat any food except what they get as alms.

*Objection*.—“As a matter of fact, it is only the Brāhmaṇa that is
entitled to eat at *Śrāddhas*; as is clear from such declarations
as—‘Which *Brahmaṇas* are to be fed at *Śrāddhaa*, and which to be
avoided?’—‘To the most deserving *Brāhamaṇa* etc.’ and so forth; from
which it is clear that the Brāhmaṇa alone is entitled to receive gifts.
Further, what we have here is a counter-exception, not an original
Injunction; and all denials are dependent upon possibility \[and in the
present case there is, as just pointed out, no possibility of the
feeding pertaining to any non-Brāhmaṇa\].”

To the above we make the following reply:—It has been ordained that
after the Brāhmaṇas have eaten, the remnant should be disposed of by
being made over to ‘relations’; and in this there is no restriction as
to caste; the man thus would feed any one who may happen to be his
‘relation’; and in this the recipients are indicated, not by the
caste-names ‘Kṣatriya’ etc., but simply by the general name ‘relation.’
It is in view of this possibility of non-Brāhmaṇas partaking of the food
at *Śrāddhas* that we have the prohibition in the Text.—(190)


