+++
title = "202 दूरस्थो नाऽर्चयेद्"

+++
What is prohibited here is the act of sending sandal-paint, garlands and
other articles of worship through a messenger. It being found possible
that one might be prompted to offer such worship by the consideration
that ‘whether one does an act himself or gets it done by another, he is
equally the *doer* in both cases, since the prompter also has been
regarded as the agent,’—the present verse prohibits such offering of
worship through other persons. There is no harm in doing this, either
when one is himself incapacitated, or when h e happens to be in a
different village; for we find people adopting such usage as—when the
Teacher has gone to another village, the pupil tells some one who
happens to be going to the same village ‘please offer my salutations to
my Teacher,’ and this other person goes and salutes him.

‘*Nor when angry*’;—it being impossible for any one to be angry with his
Teacher, the meaning is that if one happens to be angry with some one,
he should, at the time of offering hi s obeisance, give up the anger and
keep his mind calm. Some people read ‘*kruddham*,’ (making ‘angry’
qualify the Teacher).

‘*Nor near*’—in proximity to—‘*a woman*’—his loving wife; *i.e*., not
while the Teacher is seated near her. The entire process of service of
the Teacher being meant for winning his favour, anything likely to
displease him has been prohibited. It is in view of this that the term
‘woman’ has been explained as above.

‘*Conveyance*’—such as the cart and the rest.

‘*Seat*’—small or large wooden platforms.

From these one should come down and then salute the Teacher.

Under verse 119 what was laid down was simply *rising* from the seat;
while here it is *coming down* from it that is enjoined. When one is
seated upon a wooden platform, it is possible for him to *rise* without
*coming down* from it.

“But *coming down* from the seat is not possible without *rising*; so
that the *rising* being already implied in the present injunction, whàt
is laid down in 119 becomes superfluous.”

It is not superfluous; what is meant by it is that when it so happens
that the pupil is seated with his face towards one side, and the Teacher
approaches from behind him,—as soon tvs the pupil becomes cognisant of
his approach, he should turn his face towards the Teacher and then rise;
and be should not rise and then turn round; as in so doing the act of
*turning towards* the Teacher becomes intervened by that of *rising*;
and this might displease the Teacher, who would think that ‘he was
rising for some other reason, not for honouring me.’

Thus the mention of the ‘seat’ has its use in both places (here and in
119).—(202)


