+++
title = "205 गुरोर् गुरौ"

+++
The present verse permits the afore-mentioned behaviour towards one’s
Teacher to be adopted in certain other cases.

Since the whole of the present deals with study, the term ‘*guru*’
should throughout be taken in the sense of ‘teacher.’ If the teacher of
one’s Teacher happens to be near, he should behave towards him as
towards his own teacher.

‘*When he happens to be close* *by*.’—This implies that it is not
incumbent upon the pupil to go over to the house of his teacher’s
teacher for the purpose of paying respects to him.

While living in the Teacher’s house,—‘*until* *he is permitted by his
Teacher*’—allowed by him to do so,—he should not go to pay respects to
his own ‘elders’;—to his father, mother, etc. This does not mean that
when these elders come to his Teacher’s house, hc shall wait for the
Teacher’s permission before he offers obeisance to them.

“Whence do you get this meaning?”

It follows from the fact that one’s parents are the highest objects of
veneration; and as regards the paternal uncle, maternal uncle and other
relations, if one salutes them, this does not stand in the way of his
proper behaviour towards the Teacher. For after all, all his efforts are
meant to win the Teacher’s favour.

As regards the order to be observed in saluting the mother, the father
and the Teacher, when all these happen to be together,—it has already
been declared that the Mother is superior to all; and as between the
Father and the Teacher, there is option: In as much as the respect due
to the Teacher is by reason of the position of the ‘Father’ having been
imposed upon him, the Father should be regarded as superior; but since
it has been declared (in 146) that ‘the father imparting the Veda is
superior,’ it would follow that the Teacher is superior. It is for this
reason that there is option.—(205)


