+++
title = "208 बालः समान-जन्मा"

+++
For those persons who do not adopt, the reading whereby the term
‘*ācārya*’ (teacher) is made the qualification of the ‘Teacher’s son’ in
the preceding verse,—it would follow that the entire treatment of the
Teacher is to he accorded to the Teacher’s son who is qualified and
belongs to the same caste, even though he may not have done any
teaching. And it is this wide rule that is restricted by the present
verse.—It is only the Teacher’s son imparting instruction that deserves
the same honour as the Teacher,—and not he who does not impart
instruction.

“That the Teacher’s son who imparts instruction should be honoured like
the teacher follows from the mere fact of instruction having been
received from him; and from what we read in connection with the story
relating to the infant (*vide* 151 above) the propriety of similar
treatment of the junior is already known; so that even for the mention
of the ‘younger or of equal age’ the present verse would not be
required.”

True; what has been said before is the treatment to be accorded to one
who teaches the Veda, or even a portion of the Veda,—even though he be
not the regular preceptor; while the person referred to here is not one
who has made one get up the Veda; it is only one who teaches for a few
days or even for a part of the day. And since such a person would not be
either a ‘Preceptor’ or a ‘sub-teacher,’ his honouring would not be
included under what has gone before; so it becomes necessary to enjoin
it in the present connection.

It is from this verse that we understand that the entire treatment of
the Teacher is not to be accorded to one who teaches only broken parts
of a *manṭra*.

For those however who read ‘*ācārya*,’ ‘who does the work of teaching’
in the preceding verse,—the present verse would be a mere reference to
what has been enjoined before, for the purpose of adding the injunction
occurring in the next verse.

‘*Or a student of sacrificial ritual*’;—the mention of ‘sacrificial
ritual’ is only by way of illustration; the meaning is that even though
he be a mere student of a subsidiary science, or of a portion of the
Veda—*Mantra* portion or the Brāhamaṇa portion,—yet he deserves to be
honoured like the teacher; only if he happens to be the teacher’s son
and imparts instruction in some science, he should be honoured like the
teacher. Though this has been already said (in the preceding verse) yet
that does not matter, as the present verse is meant to be merely
re-iterative.

Some people offer the following explanation:—“The phrase ‘*imparting
instruction*’ stands for the *capacity of teaching*; the sense being
that if the teacher’s son has learnt the Vedas and is capable of
teaching it, he should be honoured like the teacher;—whether he actually
docs the work of teaching or not.”

This explanation is verbally quite correct. The Present Participal affix
(in ‘*adhyāpayan*,’ ‘imparting instruction’) has the sense of
*characterisation*; and this characterisation is that of an act; so that
the use is in accordance with Pāṇini 3.2.128; and the *act* is directly
mentioned as that ‘*deserving* *the same honour as the teacher*.’—(208)


