+++
title = "220 तञ् चेद्"

+++
In connection with what has gone before one should perform the following
expiatory rite.

If while the student is still sleeping, the sun should rise and thereby
make him incur sin.—‘*Abhi*’ is a preposition according to Pāṇini’s
Sūtra ‘*abhirabhāge*’; and hence we have the accusative ending in
‘*śayanam*.’—The meaning is that if while the student is sleeping, the
sun should rise, then *he should fast during the day*.

Some people oífer the following explanation:—“If the offence is
committed in the morning, the reciting and fasting are to be done during
the day, food being taken at night; while if the offence is committed in
the evening, the reciting and fasting are to be done during the night,
food being taken next morning. So that the term ‘day’ is purely
illustrative.” And in support of their view they quote the words of
Gautama (23.21)—‘He should go without food during the day, and if the
sun sets before him he should fast during the night, reciting the
*Sāvitrī*.’

This however is not right. In both cases the expiatory rite should be
performed during the day; specially as there is no authority for
regarding the term ‘day’ of the text as illustrative; as the term ‘day’
does not have its denotation dependent upon that of the term ‘night’; it
is entirely independent. Hence the right meaning appears to he that
there should be option; that is, if the person is one who will not fall
ill by keeping up the whole night, he might do it during the night;
while others would do it during the day.

That the ‘*reciting*’ is of the *Sāvitrī*, we gather from the words of
Gautama (quoted above).

“How can Gautama be quoted as authority on this point?”

As a matter of fact, the verb ‘*should recite*’ is incomplete, since it
is not mentioned what is to be recited. And when there is such
incompleteness, it is only right that the missing detail should be
filled in from other scriptural sources.

But what the term ‘*day*’ mentions is the *time*; and this does not
stand in need of any other time, so that there is no need for calling in
the help of Gautama.

Or, the right explanation may be that, since the present verse
prescribes the expiatory rite to be performed on the omission of the
twilight prayers, the reciting of the *SācUrī* eorties in naturally; it
has been declared above (2.88) that ‘there is nothing higher than the
*Sāvitrī*.’

‘*Intentionally*;’—*i.e*., who knowingly sleeps in the evening.

‘*Unintentionally*;’—when he has been sleeping for a long time and fails
to perceive the advent of evening; this is what is meant by ‘absence of
intention.’ The sense of all this is as follows:—When the omission is
intentional and due to careless-ṇess, it is necessary to perform the
expiatory rite here prescribed; he who omits the prayers at sun-set and
sun-rise, for him the expiatory rite has been prescribed as ‘fasting,’
which has to be done at the neglect of all compulsory duties.

Or, he who intentionally transgresses the scriptural ordinance, this
also is ‘ignorance’ on his part.—(220)


