+++
title = "223 यदि स्त्री"

+++
‘*If either a woman*,’—*i.e*., the teacher’s wife,—‘*or a junior
person*’—a younger boy,—having learnt from the teacher—‘*do something
good,’—i.e*., perform acts conducive to the triad beginning with
‘*dharma*’ \[ *i*. *e*., acts conducive to religious merit, worldly
prosperity and pleasure\]—‘*all that me should perform*.’ It is possible
that by reason of their association with the teacher they may have
obtained the requisite knowledge.

Or ‘*junior person*’ may stand for the Śūdra employed in the Teacher’s
service; and if he should offer such advice as—‘the two excretory organs
are to be washed in this manner,—wash your hands thoroughly, you have
forgotten the right order of applying mud and water;—when giving him
water I have often seen your Teacher washing his posterior parts in this
way that he cleans it first with mud, then with water,’—*i.e*., if being
fully cognisant of the right usage he should offer such
advice;—similarly if the Teacher’s wife should teach him the right way
to sip water; ‘*all that he should perform faithfully*’—with full faith;
and he should not disregard the advice as coming from a *Śūdra* or a
woman.

‘*Do*.’—What is meant, is practice following the precept. It is going to
be declared later on that ‘one should derive knowledge of his duty and
cleanliness from all sources.’

It is quite possible that the Teacher himself might have told his wife
to help the boy, who is like a son to him, to sip water in the right
manner; or he might tell (the servant)—‘you should give him mud and
water for cleaning his excretory organs’;—and under all these
circumstances, the pupil should follow the advice as to the using of the
mud and the pouring of water.

Or, the meaning may be that, in the matter of the purity of metal,
stone, and water, etc., he should accept as authoritative the method
adopted in the Teacher’s house by his wife and servants. In this way the
present verse would be laying down the extent to which the usage of
women and Śūdras should be relied upon.

“In this way then, the practice of all persons ignorant of the Veda
becomes authoritative; and this is not right; because as a matter of
fact, not even the slightest practice of persons ignorant of the Veda
should be authoritative. The very root (of the authority of practices)
consists of connection with persons learned in the Veda. If this root,
in the shape of connection with persons learned in the Veda, is present,
then that would supply the requisite authority; where would be the use
of mentioning the *woman*? Specially as in matters like this, no
authority can be intended, to rest in the practices of women and
*Śūdras*. If such bad been the intention of the Author, he would have
said this under the section dealing with the ‘sources of knowledge of
Dharma.’”

From all this it is clear that the truth of the matter is that the
present verse is meant to introduce the explanation of what is ‘good’
(coming in the next verse).

Or, it may be regarded as re-iterating the trustworthiness of the words
of the Teacher; the sense being—‘Even when the woman or the *Śūdra*
state the words of the Teacher, it is right to act up to them,—what to
say of what is told directly by the Teacher himself!’

‘*As also that in which his mind finds satisfaction*.’—The purport of
this has been explained under the term ‘Self-satisfaction’ (2.6).

In every way it is clear that there is not much useful purpose served by
this verse.—(223)


