+++
title = "224 धर्मार्थाव् उच्यते"

+++
In a friendly spirit, the Author now proceeds to explain what it is that
is praiseworthy, which, when carried into practice, does no harm either
visible or invisible, and which is called ‘good’ in ordinary parlance.

What is stated here is not founded on the Veda, nor is it an explanation
of the denotation of words, as we have had before in the case of such
words as ‘preception’ and the rest. The fact of the matter is that when
a man acts he seeks to obtain something ‘good’; and the Author is going
to explain that such and such a thing is the ‘good’ for the sake of
which man acts.

On this point he puts forward the different opinions that have been
held.

\(1\) Some people have held that *spiritual merit and wealth are “good*”
‘Spiritual merit’ consists in the due observance of the Injunctions and
Interdictions contained in the scriptures. ‘Wealth’ consists in cattle,
lands, gold and so forth. These alone constitute “good”; since man’s
happiness depends upon them.

\(2\) Another opinion is that ‘*pleasure and wealth*’ constitute the
“good.” Pleasure is the one thing desired by men; hence pleasure is the
“good and wealth also, since it is conducive to pleasure. The *Cārvākas*
(Atheists) have declared that “Pleasure is the one end of man, and
wealth is the means to it, as also is ‘Spiritual Merit,’ if there is
such a thing.”

\(3\) \[The third opinion is that\] Spiritual Merit is the highest
‘good’ of all,—all this being based upon that. To this end it has been
declared that ‘from Spiritual Merit proceed Wealth and Pleasure.’

\(4\) That Wealth is the sole ‘good’ is held by tradesmen aud
professionals.

\(5\) The real truth is that it consists in ‘*the aggregate of the
three*’ Hence it follows that one should attend to Wealth and Pleasure
also, but only such as are compatible with Spiritual Merit, and not such
as are contrary to it. So says Gautama (9.46)—‘One should, as far as
lies in his power, make his mornings, middays and evenings fruitful with
Spiritual Merit, Wealth and Pleasure.’

‘*Aggregate of three*’;—*i.e*., a group consisting of three factors.
That is, the name ‘good’ is applied by convention to the three taken
together.—(224)


