+++
title = "238 श्रद्दधानः शुभाम्"

+++
‘*Imbued with faith*’—the pupil who is devoted, having his innermost
soul imbued with trust in the scriptures.

‘*Excellent learning*,’—*i.e*., the science of reasoning as propounded
in the Nyāya-śāstra, etc.; or, it may mean ‘that which duly shines,’
*i.e*., good poetry and poetics as propounded by Bharata and other
writers; or, it may mean the ‘science of incantations,’ which is of no
use regarding *Dharma*.

Such learning one might ‘*acquire*’—learn—‘*even from the lowly
person*,’—*i.e*., from a person born of a lower caste. ‘*excellent
learning*’ here should not be taken as the ‘Vedic Science’; for even
though in abnormal times of distress the learning of the Veda from lower
castes may be permitted—as we shall find later on (Verse 241), yet it
cannot be permitted in normal times. That learning which is ‘*not
excellent*,’—such as the science of magic, etc.—one should not learn at
all.

‘*Lowest*’ is the Cāṇḍāla; from him even, one may learn the ‘*special
law*,’—*i.e*., law other than that expounded in *Śrutis* and *Smṛtis;
i.e*., law relating to ordinary worldly matters. The term ‘*dharma*,’
‘*law*,’ is also used in the sense of *rule*. The sense thus is that—if
even a Cāṇḍāla should say—‘such is the rule here,’—‘do not stay here for
long,’—‘do not bathe in this water,’—‘such is the custom among the
people of the village,’—‘such is the restriction imposed by the
king,’—then one should not think that he should obey only the words of
his Preceptor and he need not pay any heed to those of a *Cāṇḍāla* who
has dared to advise him.

We should not take the term ‘special law’ to mean ‘the knowledge of
truth regarding Brahman’; because it is not possible to acquire this
knowledge from the Cāṇḍāla and such people, for the simple reason that
they are ignorant of the Veda; and from no other source such knowledge
can be derived; specially as the teaching of Brahman is not like the
teaching of incantations for the cure of scorpion-bite, etc.

‘*Gem of a wife*,’—the wife who is like a gem; the compound being based
upon similitude, according to Pāṇini 2.1.56; or, it may be explained
according to Pāṇini 2.1.57 (the meaning being the ‘gem-like wife’). If
the term ‘gem’ be taken in the sense *of any good thing*, then the
compound is according to 2.1.57; if, on the other hand, the term ‘*gem*’
be taken as standing only for the emerald, the ruby and other precious
stones,—and it is applied to other things only on account of their
*excellence*, in which they resemble precious stones,—then the compound
would fall under 2.1.56. The meaning is that if a girl happens to be
possessed of a well-formed figure and a charming complexion, and she
happens to bear auspicious signs indicative of the possession of much
wealth in cash and kind, and the possibility of bearing many children
and so forth,—then she should be married, even though she belong to a
‘*base family*,’—a family wanting in the due performance of religious
acts, etc.

This forms an introduction to what is going to be enjoined under 241 *et
seq*. (in connection with abnormal times); and what is here permitted is
only when other sources are not available.—(238)


