+++
title = "241 अब्राह्मणाद् अध्यायनम्"

+++
This verse contains the injunction.

The ‘*difficulty*’ here meant is *the absence of a teacher*. The
compound ‘*āpatkālaḥ*’ is to be expounded as ‘*āpadaḥ kalaḥ*,’ ‘*time of
difficulty*.’ What is meant to be expressed being obtained from the term
‘*difficulty*’ alone, the additional term ‘*time*’ only serves to fill
up the metre.

‘*Āpatkalpe*’ is another reading. The meaning in this case would be tbat
the ‘*kalpa*,’ ‘*kalpana*,’ *assumption*, of these is permitted during
difficulties.

If the preceptor, after having begun the course of teaching, should
happen, either on account of an expiatory rite or of some other reason,
to abandon the pupil and go to another place,—and no other
Brāhmaṇa-teacher is available,—and the pupil himself being too young, is
unable to go to another place,—then he may receive teaching even from a
non-Brāhmaṇa; *i.e*., from the *Kṣatriya*, and in his absence, from the
Vaiśya. In view of the context, which began with the mention of the
‘learning of the entire Veda’ (165), the ‘*learning*’ here enjoined is
the *getting up of the Veda*.

Though the term ‘*non-Brāhmaṇa*’ denoting all the three castes, except
the Brāhmaṇa, stands for *all men*, yet the *Śūdra* could not be meant
here; for the *Śūdra* is not entitled to learn the Veda; and it is only
when one has *learnt* something that he can *teach* it.

“But by transgressing the scriptural ordinance, the Śūdra also might
learn the Veda, just as the Kṣatriya and the Vaiśya do the work of
teaching (which is not permitted).”

This also cannot be; because it has been laid down that if the *Śūdra*
happens to learn the Veda, his body should be cut up. And since the
penalty is so severe, it follows that the act is a grievous sin; and one
who commits a grevious sin is regarded as ‘fallen’; so that if the
Religious Student associated with a ‘fallen’ person, he would render
himself extremely defiled.

“But the act of teaching has been prohibited for the Kṣatriya and the
Vaiśya also; so that the same guilt would be incurred in their case.”

There is a difference between the two cases. That act is to be regarded
as extremely heinous in connection with which the scriptures prescribe
heavy penalties and expiation; while that in connection with which the
penalty and expiation prescribed are slight, should be regarded as
slight. In connection with the work of teaching done by the *Kṣatriya*
and the *Vaiśya*, the penalty and expiation laid down are not heavy, as
they are in the case of the *Śūdra*. Further, in the case of the
*Śūdra*, there would he two prohibited acts—that of *learning* the Veda,
and that of *teaching* it; while in the case of the *Kṣatriya*, there is
only one,—that of *teaching*. Then, as regards the pupil associating
with one who does the work of teaching in contravention of the law,—such
associating h as been permitted by the present verse itself; hence it
cannot be regarded as leading to defilement; for associating with the
Śūdra, who learns the Veda in contravention to law, on the other hand,
there is no authority at all.

‘*Anuvrajyā* *ca śuśrūṣā*,’ ‘*service the shape of following*’;—this is
meant to prohibit such service as *saluting, washing the feet*, and so
forth.

‘*During the course of study*’;—*i.e*., during the time required for the
getting up of the text.—(241)


