+++
title = "242 नाऽब्राह्मणे गुरौ"

+++
The foregoing verse might create the impression that the Life-long
Student may live in residence with his non-Brāhmaṇa teacher, for the
purposes of study; and it is this that is particularly interdicted here.

‘*Ātyantikam vāsam*’—means *life-long residence*.

‘*Should not live*’—should not do. The phrase ‘*vāsam* *vaṣet*,’ ‘*live
in residence*,’ may be construed by regarding one (‘*vāsa*,’
‘residence’) as the particular and the other (‘*vaset*,’ ‘*live*’) as
the general (form of the same act of *living*). The meaning being ‘he
should not *live* that particular kind of *living* which is done in the
teacher’s house,’—‘he should go elsewhere after having finished his
studies.’

“All that the preceding verse has permitted is *learning* from a
non-Brāhmaṇa; how could there be any possibility of *life-long
residence*?”

There is no force in this objection. It has been said above that one
should *reside* with his preceptor; and the teacher has been called the
‘preceptor,’ hence the said possibility arises.

‘*Or, with the Brāhmaṇa who is not an expounder*.’—‘*Or*’ here stands
for ‘also.’

The Brāhmaṇa also, if he happen to be a *non-expounder*,—*i.e*., if he
is not equipped with good character and nobility, nor capable of
studying and teaching,—all these qualifications should be taken as
indicated by ‘expounding’; for if ‘expounding’ itself were meant, then
the *non-residence with a teacher who does no expounding* would be only
natural, \[and would not need to be strictly emphasised, as it is
here\].

‘*State*’ here stands for the attainment of bliss;—‘*Unsurpassable*’—to
which nothing else is superior;—‘*denting*’—such state,—*i.e*.,
Deliverance in the form of Highest Bliss—(242)


