+++
title = "245 न पूर्वम्"

+++
This verse should be taken as prohibiting the making of presents to the
Teacher by the Life-long Student; since it lays down the gift to the
Teacher as to be presented only by the pupil who is going to take the
Final Bath, which the Life-long Student never takes; and it is the
Life-long Student that forms the subject of the context. As for the (the
other kind of student, who is only in temporary residence), he does go
on making presents to the Teacher, on every possible occasion, since the
very day of the Initiatory Rite.

‘*At first*’;—*i.e*., before the final Bath.

‘*Should not give anything to his Teacher*’;—the verb ‘*upakurvīta*’
stands here for *giving*, such being the force of the prefix; so that
the Dative in *gurave* is due to this verb itself. Or, the Teacher may
be regarded as the person aimed at by the *act* (denoted by
*upakurvīta*); and in this case the Dative would be in accordance with
the *Vārtika* on Pāṇini 2.3.13.

‘*But when going to take the Final Bath*’;—*i.e*., when the time for the
Final Bath has arrived;—‘*being ordered by the teacher*,’—in such words
as ‘bring me such and such a thing,’—he should ‘*to the best of his
capacity*’—as much as he may be able to bring,—‘*present somethin*,’
useful, ‘*to the teacher*.’

“But this verse contains (as you have asserted at the outset) the
prohibition of the Life-long Student presenting anything to the Teacher
\[and how do you reconcile this with the latter half, which prescribes
such *giving*?\].”

True; but the verse does not contain two independent sentences,—one (the
first half of the verse) prohibiting the gift, and the other (the second
half) permitting it. The fact is that there is a clear injunction that
at the Final Bath a gift should be made to the Teacher; and it is to
this injunction that the preceding prohibition is subservient; for, If
the present prohibition related to all kinds of beneñt to the Teacher,
the entire body of injunctions laying down the service of the Teacher
would become nullified; further, ‘*gift*’ is not the only *benefit* that
can be conferred; so that there is no justification for restricting the
prohibition of ‘benefit’ to the *gift of money* only, and not to the
‘doing of what is agreeable and beneficial to him.’ There is nothing
incongruous in taking the passage in a sense which is not the literal
meaning,—when the passage is a purely commendatory one; and it is quite
clear that the two halves of the verse form one syntactical whole
\[hence the former is taken as subservient and supplementary to the
latter\].—(245)


