+++
title = "246 क्षेत्रं हिरण्यम्"

+++
It has been said that he should present something to the Teacher; and
the present verse shows that any and everything should not be presented;
the sense being that if the Teacher orders—‘bring me the wife of such
and such a person,’ or ‘let me have all that you possess,’—then the
pupil shall not do what he says; what he should givo are as
fellows,—‘*Field*’—agricultural land;—‘*Gold*.’

‘*Or*’—signifies option; the sense being that all the things mentioned
shall not be given.

‘*Or at least*,’—*i.e*., in the absence of the other things.

‘*An umbrella and a pair of shoes*’;—these two being mentioned in a
copulative compound, it follows that both together have to be given.

‘*Clothes*;’—no significance is meant to be attached to the nouns in
this passage.

‘*Bringing joyfully*’;—this has to be construed with ‘*should present*,’
(of the preceding verse). If, however, we read this as ‘*prītimāharet*,’
‘should bring pleasure to his Teacher,’—then this sentence becomes
self-contained. ‘*Prītimāvahet*’ is another reading; the sense being
tbat ‘he should present the grain, etc., for bringing pleasure to the
Teacher’: or the *pleasure* may by itself be regarded as the object to
be brought to the Teacher: and in that case the mention of the things
becomes purely suggestive; the sense being that other things likely to
give him pleasure,—such as gems, pearls, corals, elephants, mules,
chariots, etc.,—may also be given. To this effect we have the saying of
Gautama (2.48)—‘On the completion of study the Teacher should be
presented with something useful.’

Only such things have to be presented as the pupil happens to possess,
he should not go about obtaining things by begging and other means, for
presenting.—(246)


