+++
title = "005 लशुनङ् गृञ्जनम्"

+++
*Gautama* (17.32).—‘Fresh leaves, mushrooms, garlic, and exudations
(from trees).’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.26, 28).—‘Red garlic, white garlic, onion and
mushroom, are not eatable; so says the Brāhmaṇa-text.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.33).—‘For eating garlic, onions, mushrooms, turnips,
Śleśmātaka, exudations from trees, the red sap flowing from incisions,
food pecked at by crows or worried by dogs, or the leavings of a
Śūdra,—*Atikṛcchra* penance.’

*Viṣṇu* (51.3, 34, 36).—‘Garlic, onion, turnips, things having the same
smell, village-pigs, village-cocks, monkey, beef,—on eating these also,
the *Cāndrāyaṇa* is to be performed.—On eating mushrooms and *Kavakas*,
the *Sāntapana* penance;—also exudations, products of unclean things,
the red sap flowing from trees.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.171).—‘Red or white exudations from trees, mushrooms
flowing out of unclean things.’

*Baudhāyana* (Aparārka, p. 247).—‘Of trees planted on unclean ground,
the flowers and fruits are not objectionable.’

*Bhaviṣyapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 511).—‘Garlic, leeks, onions,
mushrooms, brinjals, gourds—by eating these, one’s caste becomes
defiled.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 511).—‘The circular-shaped
Kuṅkuṇḍa, the Caitya-shaped and Umbrella-shaped mushrooms,—all these
were born out of the body of the Daitya.’

*Taittirīya-Śruti* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 512).—‘The red sap that
flows from trees, or any sap that flows from incisions in trees—that is
harmful.’

*Yama* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 513).—‘Garlic, leek, *Vilaya*,
*Sumuhha*, mushrooms, onion,—these the wise man should always avoid.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 511).—‘The mushroom, the village-hog,
onion, garlic,—on eating these, the Brāhmaṇa, even though he be
conversant with all the Vedas, becomes degraded.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 511).—‘*Śleśmātaka, Vrajaphalī,
Kausumbha, Nālamastaka*, and leek,—among vegetables, these are not
eatable.—Onion, garlic, *śukta*, exudations, *kucuṇḍa*, the white
brinjal, and *kumbhāṇḍa*,—these one should not eat.’
