+++
title = "008 अनिर्दशाया गोः"

+++
*Gautama* (17.22-26).—‘The milk of the cow until ten days have elapsed
since its calving, which is its period of impurity;—also of the she-goat
and the she-buffalo;—the milk of sheep and of the camel is never to be
drunk, as also that of one-hoofed animals; also the milk of the cow that
is constantly dripping milk, or which gives birth to twins or of the
irregular cow; also of the cow that has lost its calf.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.12.9-11).—‘The milk of an animal until its calf is ten
days old, and of one that gives milk while pregnant should not be
drunk;—nor that of a cow which has no calf, or which is milked with a
strange calf; the milk of sheep, camels or one-hoofed animals.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.22-24).—‘The milk of sheep,—also the milk of the
camel, the deer, the milk of the irregular cow and of the cow that gives
birth to twins,—also of the cow within ten days of its calving.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.34-85).—‘Let him not drink the milk of the cow in heat,
nor of one whose calf has died;—nor that given by cows, buffalos and
goats within ten days of calving.’

*Viṣṇu* (51.28-40).—‘All milks, except that of the cow, the goat and the
buffalo;—the milk of even these within ten days of calving;—also the
milk of those which are irregular in milk, or which constantly drip
milk, or which has lost its calf.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.170).—‘Milk of the cow in heat, of the cow within ten
days of its calving, of the cow that has lost its calf,—one should
avoid; also the milk of camels, of one-hoofed animals, of women, of wild
animals and of sheep.’

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 216).—‘The milk of all animals with two teats
should be avoided, except that of the goat.’

*Āpastamba* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 712).—‘The well-behaved Kṣatriya, or
Vaiśya or Śūdra should not drink the milk of the Kapilā cow.’

*Hārīta* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, pp. 525, 526).—‘One shall not drink the
milk of the cow in heat;—nor of the cow whose calf is absent or dead, of
the cow that has been milked dry, nor of one just calved, till seven
days have elapsed, according to some,—ten days, according to
others,—while according to some, milk becomes drinkable after a
month;—they say that for two months, all the milk should he given to the
calf; during the third month, one shall milk only two teats, during the
fourth three teats.’
