+++
title = "011 क्रव्यादाञ् शकुनान्"

+++
*Gautamā* (17.28-29)—‘Animals with two rows of teeth, hair-covered
animals, hairless animals, one-hoofed animals, house-sparrow,
*Cakravāka* and *Haṃsa*;—also crows, herons, vultures, kites, such
water-fowls as have red feet or beaks, village-hens and village hogs.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.12.1-2).—‘Tame animals should not be eaten; nor
carnivorous and tame birds.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.29, 34).—‘One-hoofed animals, camels, *gavaya*,
village-hog, *śarabha* and cows;—also carnivorous animals (are not to be
eaten).

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.48).—‘Among birds, those who seek food by scratching with
feet, the web-footed ones, the *Kalaviṅka*, the water-hen, the
flamingo... a vulture,... those feeding on flesh and those living about
villages,’

*Viṣṇu* (51.28-30).—‘On eating the flesh of carnivorous animals and
birds one should perform the *Tapta-Kṛcchra*; on eating the
*Kalaviṅka*... one should fast for three nights;—also on eating
one-footed animals and those with two rows of teeth.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.172).—‘Carnivorous birds... one-hoofed animals, animals
living about villages, etc., etc.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Aparārka, p. 248).—‘Cow, sheep, goat, horse, mule, ass and
man—these seven are the *gramya-paśus* (*grāmya-paśus*?), animals living
about villages.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘They eat animals of the village and of the forest,
sheep, goat, buffalo, deer, rhinoceros, etc., etc.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 541).—‘Cranes, flamingoes, owls,
crows, vultures, cocks, pigeons are birds that should not be eaten.’

*Yama* (Do, pp. 542 and 543).—‘Mushrooms. village-hogs, web-footed
birds,—by eating these the twice-born becomes degraded; also by eating
cows, horses, asses, camels, dogs, jackals, scratching birds, and
pecking birds.’

*Āpastamba* (Do.).—‘Among scratching birds, the cock should not he
eaten; among pecking birds, the Plava; also carnivorous birds and the
flamingo, the Bhāsa, etc., etc.’

*Parāśara* (2.11).—‘On intentionally eating the flesh of the frog or the
mouse, the twice-born becomes purified by living on barley-meal for one
day.’
