+++
title = "017 न भक्षयेद्"

+++
**(verses 5.17-18)  
**

*Gautama* (17-27).—‘Five-nailed animals should not be eaten, excepting
the hedge-hog, the hare, the porcupine, the iguana, the rhinoceros and
the tortoise.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.12-5).—‘Five five-nailed animals may be eaten—*viz*.,
the porcupine, the iguana, the hare, the hedge-hog, the tortoise and the
rhinoceros, except (perhaps) the rhinoceros.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17-37).—‘Five-nailed animals should not be eaten,
excepting the iguana, the tortoise, the porcupine, the rhinoceros, the
hare and the *Putīkaśa*.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.39, 40, 44, 47).—‘Among five-nailed animals, the
porcupine, the hedge-hog, the hare, the tortoise and the iguana may he
eaten; among domestic animals, those having only one row of teeth,
except the camel; those not mentioned as fit for eating should not be
eaten; regarding the wild boar and the rhinoceros, there are conflicting
opinions.’

*Viṣṇu* (51.6, 26, 27).—‘On eating the flesh of five-nailed
animals,—except the hare, the porcupine, the hedge-hog, the rhinoceros
and the tortoise,—one should fast seven days; on eating the flesh of the
ass, the camel and the crow, one should perform the *Cāndrāyana*,—also
on eating unknown flesh, or flesh from the slaughter-house, or dried
flesh.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.174, 177).—‘Unknown animals and birds, flesh from the
slaughter-house and dried flesh (should not be eaten). Among five-nailed
animals, the following may be eaten: the porcupine, the hedge-hog, the
alligator, the tortoise and the have.’

*Devala* (Vīramitrodaya-Āhnika, p. 543).—‘Among animals, the following
should not be eaten: the cow, the camel, the ass, the horse, the
elephant, the lion, the leopard, the bear, the *Śarubha*, serpents and
boa constrictors, the rat, the mouse, the cat, the mongoose, the
village-hog, the dog, the jackal, the tiger, the black-faced monkey, the
man and the monkey.’
