+++
title = "059 दशाहं शावम्"

+++
*Gautama* (14.1).—‘The *Sapiṇḍas* become impure by death during ten
days,—except those who officiate as priests, who have performed the
initiatory sacrifice and religious students.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.1).—‘Referring to deaths and births, they declare
that the impurity of *Sapiṇḍas* lasts for ten days, except for the
officiating priest, or one who has performed the initiatory sacrifice,
or the religious student.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.16).—‘It is ordained that impurity caused by a death shall
last ten days in the case of *Sapiṇḍa* relations.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.1).—‘Impurity due to death and birth shall last for ten days
for the Brāhmaṇa, among Sapiṇḍas.’ *Yājñavalkya* (3.18).—(See above,
under 58.)

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (4.4.18).—‘For ten days after the death of a
Sapiṇḍa (study and gifts are to be avoided).’

*Śāṅkhāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (4.7.6).—‘If a death or birth has occurred, for
ten days (shall study be discontinued).’

*Parāśara* (Aparārka, p. 894).—‘The Brāhmaṇa equipped with fire and Veda
becomes purified in a single day; one endowed with the Veda only, in
three days; one devoid of special qualifications, in ten days.’

*Dakṣa* (Do.).—‘There are options in regard to impurity due to birth—for
the moment, for one, three, four, six, ten, twelve or fifteen days, for
a month, and till death. No such impurity attaches to the persons who
know the text and the meaning of the Veda, along with the subsidiary
sciences, rituals and esoteric doctrines, and are also devoted to the
performance of religious rites.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘There is no impurity when Vedic Study is carried on,
when Homa is offered at both times and when the Vaiśvadeva-offerings are
constantly made. The Brāhmaṇa equipped with Fire and Veda becomes
purified in one day; those with lesser qualifications, in three and four
days. One without the Fire, in three days; the common Brāhmaṇa, in ten
days; one who lives upon pickings and gleanings is immediately purified;
for one whose sole possession is the *Gāyatrī* and who duly offers the
three twilight-prayers, and who does not live the life of the dog, the
impurity lasts for six days.’

Parāśara (Do.).—(Same as above; but ‘*Mahābhārata is read*’ in place
‘*Homa is offered at both times*).’

*Dakṣa* (Do. p. 895).—‘The twice-born man who takes his food without
bathing or making oblations, is always impure; also one who is an
invalid, a miser, one in debt, one devoid of religious acts, and
illiterate, one who is controlled by his wife and so forth.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 895).—‘The man who has a second wife is
beset with permanent impurity.’

*Śātātapa* (Do.).—‘One who is degraded in birth and death, who is devoid
of twilight-prayers, and who only bears the name of the *Brāhmaṇa*,
becomes pure in ten days.’

*Parāśara* (l.3.6.).—(Same as above.)

(Do.) (1.3.7, etc.).—‘Those who arc of the same Piṇḍa are affected by
impurity. Up to the fourth grade, the impurity lasts ten days; at the
fifth grade, six days; at the sixth, four days; at the seventh, three
days.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 583).—‘On the death of the Brāhmaṇa,
the Śūdra, the Vaiśya and the Kṣatriya are purified in ten days.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘On the death of the Brāhmaṇa, all his Sapiṇḍa relations
are impure for ten days.’
