+++
title = "066 रात्रिभिर् मास-तुल्याभिर्"

+++
*Gautama* (14.17-18).—‘For miscarriage the impurity lasts for a number
of days, equal to the number of months from conception;—or for three
days.’

*Baudhāyana*, (1.11.31).—‘On miscarriage, the female remains impure for
as many days as months that may have elapsed since conception.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.72).—‘The woman in her courses becomes pure by bathing, on
the fourth day.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.20).—‘On miscarriage, purification is brought about by
the lapse of as many nights as the months (that may have elapsed since
conception).’

*Ādipurāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 901).—‘If there is miscarriage within six
months of conception, then purification is brought about by the lapse of
days equal in number to that of the months; after six months the
purification follows the ordinary rule of the caste. For the *Sapiṇḍas*,
the purification is immediate.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 901).—‘On the death of a child less than two
years old and on miscarriage, the *Sapiṇḍas* are impure for three days.’

*Marīci* (Aparārka, p. 901).—‘On miscarriage, for the Brāhmaṇa, the
impurity lasts three days; for the Kṣatriya, four days; for the Vaiśya,
five days, and for the Śūdra eight days. On miscarriage, the mother
herself remains impure in accordance with the number of months, while
the father and others remain impure for three days.’

*Vṛddha-Vaśiṣṭha* (Aparārka, p. 901).—‘On miscarriage, the woman herself
is impure for as many days as the number of months; the man is purified
by simple bathing; but after three days if the pregnancy had advanced.’

*Smṛtyantara* (Aparārka, p. 901).—‘Till the fourth month the miscarriage
is called “*Srāva*,” *Flowing out*; during the fifth and sixth months,
it is called “*Pāta*” *Falling out*; after that it is “*Prasūti*,”
*child-birth*; and the impurity due to this last lasts for four days.’
