+++
title = "067 नृणाम् अकृतचूडानाम्"

+++


*Viṣṇu* (22-29-30).—‘On the death of a child after teething, hut before
tonsure, the impurity lasts for a day and night; after tonsure, but
before initiation, for three days.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.23).—‘Before teething, the impurity is for the moment
only; till tonsure, for one night; till initiation, three nights; after
that, ten days.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 909).—‘If the child dies within ten days, the
impurity ceases at once; in fact, in this case there is neither *death*
nor impurity.’

*Vṛddha-Manu* (Aparārka, p. 910).—‘If the child happen to die within ten
days, one need not observe anything due to death.’

*Hārīta* (Aparārka, p. 910).—‘If the child is born dead, or if it dies
immediately on birth, the *Sapiṇḍas* remain impure for ten days.’

*Bṛhat-Mann* (Aparārka, p. 910).—‘If the child dies immediately after
birth, or if it is still-born, then for the mother there is impurity for
the entire period; for the father and others, for three days.’

*Bṛhat-Pracetas* (Aparārka, p. 910).—‘If the child dies after living for
just one moment, the mother is purified in ten days, and the *Sagotras*
at the same moment.’

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, 910).—‘If the child dies before the lapse of ten
days, the mother is affected by the entire impurity due to child-birth;
but the father becomes purified by bathing. In the case of the child
dying before teething, the purification is immediate; after tonsure, in
one day; before initiation, its relations become purified in three days.
Before the naming ceremony, it is immediate.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Aparārka, p. 910).—‘In the case of children dying before
teething, the impurity due to their death lasts three days.’

*Kaśyapa* (Aparārka, p. 910).—‘In the case of children dying before
teething, purification comes in throe days.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 911).—‘On the death of a child before teething, as
also on miscarriage, all the *Sapiṇḍas* become pure after a day.’

*Aṅgiras* (Aparārka, p. 911).—‘When a child dies before tonsure, and
after teething, one should remain impure for three days after cremating
it On the death of a Brāhmaṇa child before it is throe years old, the
impurity lasts one night; on that of a Kṣatriya, three days; of a
Vaiśya, three days.

......In the case of the Brāhmaṇa dying after tonsure, the impurity
lasts for three days; of the Kṣattnya, six days; of the Vaiśya, nine
days. If a Śūdra child dies before three years, the impurity lasts five
days.’

*Ṛṣyaśṛṅga* (Aparārka, p. 911).—‘Where the impurity for the Brāhmaṇa
lasts three days, that for the Kṣatriya, Vaiśya and Śūdra, lasts for
six, nine and twelve days respectively.’

*Hārīta* (Aparārka, p. 911.).—‘Before the Upanayana, for all castes, the
impurity lasts for three days in the case of the death of the boy, and
for one day in that of a girl.’

*Pāraskara* (Aparārka, p. 911).—‘On the death of a child less than two
years old, the impurity attaches to the parents only.’
