+++
title = "073 अ-क्षार-लवणान्नाः स्युर्"

+++
*Gautama* (14.37-39).—‘During the period of impurity, they shall sleep
and sit on the ground and remain chaste; they shall not clean
themselves; nor shall they eat moat until the offerings have been made’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.21).—When a death has occurred, they
shall............ sit during four days on mats, eating food that does
not contain condiments or salt.’

*Āpastamba* (2.15.7-9).—‘Diśevelling their hair and covering themselves
with dust,...stopping into the river, they throw up water for the dead
once and then, ascending the bank, sit down; this they repeat thrice.
They pour out water......... return to the village without looking back,
and perform those rites for the dead which women declare to he
necessary.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.16).—‘Eating food got by purchase or got without
asking, they shall sleep separately on the ground; and shall offer to
the dead food, according to the *Piṇḍayajña* rites, for three days.’

*Āśvalāyana Gṛhyasūtra* (4.4.14).—‘Let them not cook food during that
night; let them subsist on bought or readymade food; let them eat no
saline food for three days,’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.11-15).—‘After having burnt the body, the relations enter
the water without looking back. Facing the south, they shall pour out
water with both hands on those days that are marked by odd numbers.
After they have gone home they shall sit during the other days, on mats,
fasting. If they are unable to do this, they shall subsist on food
bought in the market or given unasked.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Aparārka, p. 885).—‘For one day there should he fasting,
or they should eat what is obtained unasked.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya* (Do.).—‘They shall eat what is bought or obtained unasked,
and remain calm; they shall eat no meat; nor have recourse to women.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘Having bathed, they offer water to the dead for
three days.’
