+++
title = "074 सन्निधाव् एष"

+++
**(verses 5.73-74)  
**

*Viṣṇu* (23.39-41).—‘Living in a foreign land, if one hears of a birth
or a death, his impurity lasts dining those days that may remain of the
prescribed period of impurity; if he hears of it just after the lapse of
the prescribed period of impurity, and before the lapse of one year, he
becomes pure in one night;—after that by bathing.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.21).—‘In the ease of one dying in a foreign land, the
impurity lasts during the remaining days of the period; if no days
remain, then during three days; if one year has elapsed, one becomes
pure by offering water to the dead.’

*Pāraskara Gṛhyasūtra* (3, 10.44-45).—‘If one dies while absent on a
journey, his relations shall sit on the ground from the time that they
have heard of the death, offering water until the period of impurity has
elapsed. If that period has already elapsed, then through one night, or
three nights.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.35).—‘If a person dies in a foreign country, and his
*Sapiṇḍas* hear of his death after ten days, the impurity lasts for one
day and night.’

*Devala* (Aparārka, p. 904).—‘If the death of a relative in foreign
lands is heard of within three fortnights, the impurity lasts three
days; up to six months, for one night and the days preceding and
following it; up to a year, for one day; after that one becomes pure by
bathing.’

*Viṣṇu* (Do.).—‘If it is heard of before the lapse of three fortnights,
the impurity lasts three days; before six months, for a day and night;
before one year, one day,—in the case of a man dying in foreign lands.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Do.).—‘The son, even though he be living in distant lands,
on hearing of the death of his parents, shall remain impure for ten days
beginning from the day on which he hears of it.’

*Gautama* (14.44).—‘If infants living in a distant country, or a
renunciate, or a n on- *Sapiṇḍa* die, the purification is
instantaneous.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.36).—‘Gautama declares that if a person who has kindled
the sacred fires dies on a journey, his *Sapiṇḍas* shall again celebrate
his obsequies and remain impure for ten days.’

*Parāśara* (3.10).—‘If one hears of the death of a *Sagotra* in a
foreign land, he is not impure either for one day or for three days; he
becomes purified immediately by bathing.’
