+++
title = "079 अन्तर्-दशाहे स्याताम्"

+++
*Gautama* (14.6).—‘If during a period of impurity, another death occurs,
the relatives shall he pure after the lapse of the remainder of the
former period.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.17-18).—‘If a birth and a death occur together, one
and the same period of ten days shall serve for both. If other births or
deaths happen before the completion of the ten days of the first
impurity, that first period will suffice; provided the new course of
impurity occurs before the end of the ninth day.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.23-25).—‘If during a period of impurity, another death or
birth occurs, the relatives shall be pure after the expiry of the
remainder of that first period. But if one night only of the first
period of impurity remain, they shall be pure after two days and nights.
If the second death or birth occurs on the morning of the day on which
the first period expires, they shall he pure after three days and
nights.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.35-38).—‘If during the period of impurity due to birth,
another birth occurs, then purification comes after the expiry of the
first period of impurity. If the second occurs when only one night
remains of the first period, then purification comes after two days. If
it occurs on the morning of the last day of the first period, then after
three days. Similarly on the death of a relative during the period of
impurity due to death.

*Yājñavalkya* (3.20).—‘If another birth or death happen during a period
of impurity, one becomes purified on the lapse of the remaining daws.’

*Aṅgiras* (Aparārka, p. 898).—If during a period of impurity due to
birth, a death occurs,—or during a period of impurity due to death, a
birth occurs,—then, the impurity is to he observed in accordance with
the death, not with the birth.’

*Ṣaṭtṛṃśan-mata* (Do.).—‘If during an impurity due to death, a birth
occurs, then purification from the impurity duo to the birth comes after
the lapse of the period of impurity due to death; the birth is not
purificatory of the impurity due to death.’

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 899).—‘When two equal causes of impurity
coalesce, the impurity should cease with the former; if they are not
equal, then with the second; such is the declaration of Dharmarāja.’

*Śaṅkha* (Do., p. 900).—‘If after the mother’s death the father dies,
then purification comes after the lapse of the impurity due to the
father’s death.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘If a cause happens lengthening the period of an impurity,
the impurity should cease with what happens later. If during a three-day
period of impurity, a ten-day impurity should occur, then purification
comes with the end of this latter.’

*Hārīta* (Aparārka, p. 900).—‘If an impurity due to death occurs during
an impurity due to death, purification comes with the lapse of the
previous impurity. A shorter impurity can remove another only when the
latter is a short one.’

*Prajāpati* (Do.).—‘If a son happen to be born during an impurity due to
another birth, then the father’s purification is immediate; he being
purified by the lapse of the previous impurity. When several impurities
coalesce, purification comes on the lapse of that which is the more
serious; when there is coalescence of impurity due to birth and another
due to death, that due to death is the more serious.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘There are two parts to every period of impurity;
if a fresh cause of impurity happen within the first part of a previous
impurity, then the purification comes on the lapse of the previous
impurity; if however it happen after that, then it comes on the lapse of
the second impurity. Similarly when during the impurity duo to one
death, another death happens. If during the impurity due to death, a
birth occurs,—or during the impurity due to birth, a death occurs,—then
purification comes on the lapse of the impurity duo to death.’

*Uśanas* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 622).—‘If during a shorter impurity, a
longer one happens, the purification cannot come with the lapse of the
former; it must take its own time.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘When circumstances prolonging the impurity occur,
purification comes on the lapse of the succeeding one; but if the second
impurity occurs before the fifth day of the first one, then purification
comes on the lapse of the first one.’

*Parāśara* (3.28-29).—‘If during the ten days of impurity, another birth
or death should occur, the Brāhmaṇa shall remain impure till the expiry
of those ten days.’
