+++
title = "084 न वर्धयेद्"

+++
*Yājñavalkya* (3.17).—‘One should continue to perform all the
fire-worship, as also all those acts that are enjoined in the Veda.’

*Vyāghrapāt* (Aparārka, p. 892).—‘During the period of impurity one
should stop all *smārta* rites; but for the purpose of *śrauta* rites,
one becomes pure immediately, by bathing.’

*Pāraskara Gṛhyasūtra* (3.13.31-34).—‘During the period of impurity, one
should not carry on Vedic study one should intermit the daily rites,
with the exception of those performed with the help of the *śrauta*
fire, or with that of the domestic fire, according to some:—others
should perform those for him.’

*Jābāla* (Aparārka, p. 892).—‘During the impurity due to birth and
death, there is no intermission of rites performed in the *śrauta* fire;
as regards the domestic fire, libations into it should be poured by
persons belonging to another *gotra*.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘During impurity due to birth or to death, one shall
not abandon the fire-offerings, he shall have them offered by others.’

*Jātūkarṇya* (Do.).—‘During an impurity, *Piṇḍayajña, Caru-Yajña*, and
*Homa*, should be got done by a person not belonging to the same
*gotra*.’

*Saṃvarta*, (Do.).—‘The Homa-offerings should, during impurity, be made
with dry grains or fruits; but the performance of the five Great
Sacrifices should be intermitted. For ten days, the Brāhmaṇa shall
desist from the *Vaiśvadeva* offering.’

*Viṣṇupurāṇa* (Do.).—‘O king, the offering of the twilight-prayers
should he done at all times, except during impurity.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Do.).—‘During impurity, one shall only offer water with
the *Sāvitrī* and meditating upon the sun, offer his obeisance.’

*Pulastya* (Do. p. 893).—‘The twilight-prayers, the Iṣṭi, the *Caru* and
*Homa* one should perform all through life; even during impurity one
shall not omit these During impurity due to death or birth, one should
not omit the twilight prayers; the Brāhmaṇa shall repeat the *mantras*
only mentally—even so omitting the Breath-suspension.’
