+++
title = "085 दिवाकीर्तिम् उदक्याम्"

+++
*Gautama* (14.30).—‘On touching an outcast, a Caṇḍāla, a woman impure on
account of confinement, a woman in her courses, or a corpse,—and on
touching persons who have touched them,—he shall purify himself by
bathing in his clothes.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.9.5).—‘On touching a tree standing on a sacred spot, a
funeral pyre, a sacrificial post, a *Caṇḍāla*, or a person who sells the
Veda,—a Brāhmaṇa shall bathe in his clothes.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.36).—‘On touching one who sells the Veda, a
sacrificial post, an outcast, a funeral pyre, a dog or a *Caṇḍāla*, he
shall bathe.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (4.37).—‘When he has touched a sacrificial post, a pyre, a
burial ground, a menstruating woman, a woman lately confined, impure
men, or *Cāṇḍalas* and so forth,—he shall bathe, submerging both bis
body and his head.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.69).—‘After having touched one who has touched a corpse, or
a woman in her courses, or a *Caṇḍāla* or a sacrificial post,—bathing is
ordained.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.29).—‘On touching a woman in her courses or persons
suffering from impurity due to birth and death, one should bathe; on
touching persons who have touched them he shall rinse his mouth.’

*Saṃvarta* (Aparārka, p. 921).—‘For one who touches one who has touched
these, bathing has been enjoined.’

*Viṣṇu* (Do.).—‘On touching a woman in her courses, a corpse, a
*Caṇḍāla*, human bone with fat, one should bathe with his clothes on.’

*Chyavana* (Do., p. 922).—‘One shall bathe with clothes on on touching
an outcast, a *Caṇḍāla*, one who lives upon property belonging to gods,
the village-priest, the Soma-vendor, the sacrilìcial post, a funeral
pyre, a wood of the pyre, wine, wine-vessel, human bone with fat, one
who has touched a corpse, a woman in her courses, one who has committed
a heinous crime, or a corpse; after bathing, he should touch fire,
repeat the *Gāyatrī* a hundred and eight times, bathe again and then
rinse his mouth thrice.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Aparārka, p. 922).—‘An outcast, a woman lately confined, a
*Caṇḍāla*,— on touching these intentionally one becomes purified by
bathing with clothes on, touching fire and eating butter. On touching a
person who has touched a corpse, a *Caṇḍāla*, a funeral pyre, a
sacrificial post, a woman in her courses, intentionally, the Brāhmaṇa
shall become purified by bathing.’

*Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa* (Aparārka, p. 923).—‘One whose food should not be
eaten, a woman lately confined, a eunuch, a cat, a *Caṇḍāla*, a dog, a
cock, an outcast, an excommunicated person, a corpse-carrier, a woman in
her courses, a pig,—on touching these one becomes purified by bathing.’

*Vṛddha-Yājñavalkya* (Do.).—‘On touching a *Caṇḍāla*, a *Pukkasa*, a
*Mleccha*, a *Bhilla*, a *Pārasīka*, one who has committed a heinous
crime,—one should bathe with clothes on.’

*Parāśara* (Do.).—‘On touching a tree growing in a crematorium, a
funeral pyre, a sacrificial post, a *Caṇḍāla*, a Soma-vendor,—the
Brāhmaṇa should enter water with clothes on.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘A *Caṇḍāla*, an outcast, a corpse-carrier, a woman
lately confined, a woman in her courses,—on touching these one becomes
purified by bathing.’

*Vāyupurāṇa* (Do.).—‘The woman in her courses, the woman lately
confined, the dog, the *Antyāvasāyin*, the corpse-carrier,—on touching
these there is impurity, from which one becomes purified by bathing with
clay and with clothes on.’

*Parāśara* (Do., p. 926).—‘If one happens to touch a *Caṇḍāla* and the
corpse and other things after sunset, he becomes purified by touching
fire and gold.’

*Aṅgiras* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 257).—‘On touching a person who has
touched a corpse, a woman in her courses and a woman lately confined or
one outcast—one becomes purified on bathing with clothes on.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Do., p. 258).—‘If one touches by chance a person who has
been touched by a *Caṇḍāla*, a woman lately confined, or a corpse,—he
shall sip water and do *japa*; if one intentionally touches the said
person, he should sip water for the purpose of purifying himself.’
