+++
title = "093 न राज्ञाम्"

+++
*Vaśiṣṭha* (19.48).—(Same as Manu.)

*Gautama* (14.1.45-46).—‘The *Sapiṇḍas* become impure by the death of a
relative during ton days, except those who are officiating as priests,
who have performed the initiatory sacrifice and the religious student.
Kings remain always pure, lest their business be impeded,—also the
Brāhmaṇa, lest his daily study of the Veda be interrupted.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.11.1).—‘Referring to deaths and births, they declare
that the impurity of *Sapiṇḍas* lasts ten days; except for officiating
priests, men who have performed the initiatory ceremony of the
Soma-Sacrifice, and students of the Veda.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.48-55).—‘Nor do kings become impure, while engaged in the
discharge of their duties, nor devotees fulfilling a vow; nor sacrifices
engaged in a sacrificial performance; nor workmen while engaged in their
work; nor those who perform the king’s orders, if the king desires them
to be pure; nor can impurity arise during the installation of the
monument of a deity, nor during a marriage ceremony, if those ceremonies
have already begun; nor when the whole country is afflicted with a
calamity; nor in times of public distress.’

*Yājñavalkya* (3.27.28).—‘For officiating priests, for those initiated
for a sacrifice, for those engaged in sacrificial work, for those
engaged in a sacrificial session, for the religious student, for the
person engaged in charities, for the knower of Brahman,—also during a
marriage, during the giving of charities, during a sacrifice, during
war, in times of public distress, and in times of great
trouble,—purification is instantaneous.’

*Parāśara* (3.20-22).—‘Mechanics, artists, physicians, slaves and
slave-girls, barbers, kings and Vedic scholars have been declared to be
such as are purified instantaneously; so also the man keeping a penance,
one engaged in a sacrificial session and the twice-born person who has
taken the Fires. There is no impurity for the king, or for the person
for whom the king desires it to cease, or one who is going to engage in
battle, or in a charity, or one who is in distress, or the Brāhmaṇa who
has been invited.’

*Ādipurāṇa* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 615).—‘The work done by the painter and
other artists is such as is not known to others; hence in the doing of
their own work, they are always pure. The work that is done by the cook
is such as is not known to others; hence the cook is always pure. What
is done by the physician cannot be done by any one else; hence for
purposes of touching, the physician is always pure. The work that the
male and the female slaves do with ease, no one else can do; hence they
are always pure. The work that the king does—how can any one even dream
of doing? Such being the case the king is always pure, in the matter of
births and deaths. The driving of elephants and such other works as are
done by the royal servants cannot be done by others; hence these are
always pure.’

*Pracetas* (Do.).—‘Mechanics, artists, physicians, male and female
slaves, kings and royal servants are declared to be such as become
purified instantaneously.’

*Vṛddha-Parāśara* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 616).—‘There is no impurity for
kings, or for religious students, persons engaged in sacrificial
sessions, persons initiated for a sacrifice, and all those for whom the
king wishes it There is no impurity due to birth or death, for those
engaged in penance or charity.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 617.).—‘The Kṣatriya engaged in battle, the Vaiśya
seated among cows, the Brāhmaṇa engaged in a sacrificial session and the
religious student are always pure.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Do.).—‘There is no impurity during marriage or sacrifice
or trouble or journey or pilgrimage.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘In the installation of a god’s image, in the
performance of a communal sacrifice, during Śrāddha and such rites, or
during *Pitṛyajña*, or in the giving away of the daughter,—there is no
impurity.’

*Aṅgiras* (Do.).—‘There is no impurity due to birth or death on three
occasions—during a sacrificial performance, during marriage and during a
sacrifice to gods.’

*Kātyāyana* (Aparārka, p. 919).—‘After the Initiatory Ceremony at a
sacrifice, and during the performance of the *Kṛcchra* and other
penances, there is no impurity, even on the death of the father. The
impurity comes after the completion of the performance and lasts for
three days. So also for religious students.’

*Jābāla* (Do., p. 920).—‘For the religious student, the king, the
ascetic, the artist, the initiated person, during a sacrifice or
marriage or a sacrificial session,—there is no impurity,’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘For the priest who has accepted the Honey-mixture
in connection with a sacrificial performance, if a cause for impurity
arises, it dues not apply to him. So also for the person who has been
initiated for a sacrifice, till the Final Bath. Nor is there any
impurity for the calm ascetic firm in Vedānta, etc., etc.’
