+++
title = "095 डिम्भाहव-हतानाञ् च"

+++
*Gautama* (14.9-12).—‘The relations of those who are slain for the sake
of cows and Brāhmaṇas become pure immediately; also those of men
destroyed by the anger of the king; of those killed in battle; likewise
those of men who voluntarily die by starving themselves, by weapons,
fire, poison or water, by hanging themselves or by jumping from a
precipice.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.47, 52).—‘The relatives of those who have been killed by
jumping from a precipice, or by fire or by fasting, or by water, in
battle, by lightning, or by the king, do not become impure; nor those
who perform the king’s orders, if the king wishes them to he pure.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 907).—‘The relatives of those killed in a riot, or
those of suicides, or of those who have been drowned in river or killed
by wild animals, become purified instantaneously.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Do.).—‘For the relations of those killed in rots, or by
lightning, or by the king, or in the saving of cows and Brāhmaṇas, they
have declared instantaneous purification; but some sages have declared
that the impurity lasts three days.’

*Parāśara* (3.29-30).—‘For the relations of persons who have died for
the sake of Brāhmaṇas, or in the saving of prisoners or cows, and those
who have died in battle, the impurity lasts for one night.’

*Sumantu* (Aparārka, p. 917).—‘For those killed by jumping from a
precipice, or by ûre or water, or in battle,—those who die in foreign
lands, the renunciate—those killed by fasting, those killed by
lightning, or those who have committed suicide by going on the Great
Journey,—water-offerings may be made, and the purification is
instantaneous.’

*Kāśyapa* (Do.).—‘The relations of those killed by fasting or by
lightning, or by entering fire or water, by fall from a precipice, or in
battle, or in foreign land,—or of embryos, or of infants that have
teethed,—are purified in three nights.’
