+++
title = "117 चरूणां स्रुक्-स्रुवाणाम्"

+++
**(verse 5.115)**

*Parāśara* (7.2).—(Same as Manu.)

*Baudhāyana* (1.8.50, 51).—‘The cups and vessels used at sacrifices are
cleansed according to the injunction:—the Veda declares that they do not
become impure through *Soma*.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.13.30-32).—‘Purification by washing with Kuśa-grass and
water is prescribed at the *Agnihotra*, the *Gharmocchiṣṭa*, the
*Dadhigharma*, the *Kuṇḍapāyināmayana* the *U* *tsar* *jināmayana*, the
*Dākṣāyaṇa* sacrifice, the *Ardhodaya*, the *Catuścakra*, and the
*Brahmandanas*;—also at all Soma-sacrifices, the cups should be cleansed
with water only on the *Mārjālīya* mound; if these cups are defiled by
urine, ordure, blood, semen and the like, they must be thrown away.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.13).—‘At a sacrifice, vessels should he cleansed
according to Vedic injunctions.’

*Viṣṇu* (23.8-11).—‘Stone cups and vessels used at Soma-sacrifices are
cleansed with water:—sacrificial pots, ordinary wooden ladles, and
wooden ladles with two collateral excavations are cleansed with hot
water. Vessels used for oblations are cleansed by rubbing them with hand
(with Kuśa-blades) at the time of the sacrifice. Sword-shaped pieces of
wood for stirring the boiled rice, winnowing baskets, implements used
for preparing grain, pestles and mortars are cleansed by sprinkling
water over them.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.182-183).—(See under 110 and further.)

*Do*. (1.185).—(Same as Manu)

**(verse 5.116)**

*Parāśara* (7.3).—(Same as Manu.)

*Viṣṇu* (23.2-11).—(See under 115.)

*Yājñavalkya* (1.183, 184).—‘*Caru*, *sruk*, *sruva* and greasy vessels
are cleansed with hot water; the *Sphya*, the *Śūrpa*, the skins and
grains, as also pestles, mortars and carts and heaps of cloth and grains
heaped together,—are cleansed by sprinkling water over them.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.13.26).—‘Wooden vessels touched by impure man shall he
scraped.’

*Laugākṣi* (Aparārka, p. 259).—‘Large quantities of things, touched by
*Caṇḍālas* and others, are purified by sprinkling water; a small
quantity of grain should be washed; but rice,??? small quantity, should
be thrown away.’

*Baudhāyana* (Do.).—‘Grains are purified by sprinkling water;
vegetables, roots and fruits by water; or by removing just the defiled
portion, or by removing the chaff.’

*Viṣṇu*—‘Of uncooked grains, one should throw away just that quantity
which has been defiled, and the rest should be threshed and washed.’
