+++
title = "122 प्रोक्षणात् तृण-काष्ठम्"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (23.56).—‘A house is purified by scouring it with a broom, and
smearing the ground with cow-dung, and a book by sprinkling water over
it. Land is cleansed by smearing it with cow-dung.’

*Gautama* (1.29).—‘Metals should he scoured; things made of clay should
be thoroughly heated by fire; those of wood should be planed; and cloth
made of yarns should be washed.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.8.34).—‘Earthen vessels must be heated.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.13.21-25).—‘Grass placed on unconsecrated ground should
he washed; grass defiled out of one’s sight should he sprinkled; small
pieces of fuel should be purified in the same manner; large pieces of
wood should be washed and dried; but a large quantity of wood should be
sprinkled with water.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.14.1, 2).—‘Earthen vessels touched by impure persons
must he exposed to the fire of *kuśa* grass; those defiled by stains of
food-leavings should be exposed to another burning.’

*Āpastamba* (1.17.9, 10).—‘If he eats out of an earthen vessel, he shall
eat out of one that has not been used; if he gets a used vessel, he
shall use it after having heated it thoroughly.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.49, 58).—‘Objects of metal should be scoured with ashes;
those of clay should be thoroughly heated by fire; those of wood should
he planed and cloth made of yarns should be washed. They quote the
following:—“A woman is purified by her courses, a river by its current,
brass by ashes, and an earthen pot by another burning.”’

*Viṣṇu* (23, 16, 18, 33).—‘Grass, fire-wood, dry cow-dung and leaves arc
cleansed by sprinkling of water; these same when defiled without stains,
by washing, when there is a small quantity of them; earthen vessels are
cleansed by a second burning.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.187-188).—‘Earthenware is cleansed by a second burning;
the ground is purified by sweeping, burning and lapse of time, by cows
walking over it, by sprinkling and scraping. The house is cleansed by
sweeping and smearing.’

*Uśanas* (Aparārka, p. 263).—‘Earthenware smeared with food-leavings
should be washed; those touched by such leavings should be sprinkled.’

*Devala* (Do. 7, p. 265).—‘The ground is cleansed in five ways—by
digging, by burning, by smearing, by washing and by rain.’

*Yama* (Do.).—‘The ground is purified in seven ways—by digging, by
filling, by burning, by rain, by smearing, by cows passing over it and
by lapse of time; ground is pure everywhere except whore it bears
perceptible traces of impurity.’

*Baudhāyana* (Do.).—‘When a house has been defiled by the touch of a
corpse, its walls should be scraped, sun’s rays should be made to enter
it and it should be touched by burning fire. Solid ground should be
smeared; that with holes should he ploughed over; wet ground should have
all impurities removed and then covered over.’

*Saṃvarta* (Do.).—‘When a house has been defiled by the presence of a
dead body in it, all earthen vessels and cooked food should be thrown
away; then it should be smeared with cow-dung, and goats should be made
to smell it, then the whole of it should be sprinkled by Brahmaṇas with
*kuśa* and water.’

*Marīci* (Aparārka, p. 266).—‘If an outcast enter a house, it is
purified by smearing; if he dwells in it, then it should be burnt or
demolished.’
