+++
title = "125 पक्षि-जग्धङ् गवा"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (23.38).—‘Food nibbled at by a bird, smelt at by a cow, sneezed
on. or defiled by hair, or bv insects or worms, is purified by earth
scattered over it.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (14.22-23).—‘Food defiled by contact with a garment, hair or
insects shall not be eaten;—but it may be eaten after taking out the
hair and the insects, sprinkling it with water, dropping ashes on it,
and after it has been declared by the Brahmaṇa to be fit for eating.

*Yājñavalkya* (1.189).—‘Food smelt by the cow, or defiled by hair, flies
or insects, should have water and ashes or earth sprinkled over it, for
purifying it.’

*Baudhāyana* (Aparārka, p. 266).—Blue fly, ordure, insects, bugs are
defilers of food. On seeing hair, insect, nail, etc., in food, that part
of the food where they are found should be thrown away, and the
remainder should have ashes and water sprinkled over it; and it may be
taken, after it has been recommended.’

*Yama* (Do., p. 266).—‘If a fly or hair is found in the food, or if it
is sneezed at or blown upon, one should touch it with ash and then eat
it.’

*Āpastamba* (Do.).—‘That food wherein is found an insect that has
touched impure substances.’

*Śātātapa* (Do., p. 267)—‘Food containing hair or insects, or smelt
upon, or defiled by flies, or seen by a newly delivered woman, or by a
woman in her courses, or by a heretic,—is purified in the following
manner: sprinkling water over it, taking out a little of the food, the
rest one may eat. Or he may touch it with ashes or with water, or by
gold and silver.’

*Baudhāyana* (again, Aparārka, p. 267).—‘If cooked sacrificial food is
defiled by crows and other things, the portion defiled should be taken
out. Honey and water become purified by being poured into another
vessel; similarly oil and clarified butter.’

*Hārīta* (Do.).—‘On food being smelt or seen by undesirable persons, or
on its being defiled by the presence of hair or insects, it should be
touched by water, with gold, silver, ashes, copper, emerald, cow’s hair,
deer-skin or *kaśa*,—sprinkled with *mantras*, taken round fire, exposed
to the sun; thus does it become purified.’

*Parāśara* (Do.).—‘Food cooked when exceeding a *Droṇa* in quantity
should not he thrown away, even when defiled by dogs or crows; it should
he offered to Brāhmaṇas and then used according to their advice.’

*Jamadagni* (Do.).—‘Cooked food, one *Droṇa* in weight,—if defiled by
dogs or crows, should have a handful thrown out, and the rest becomes
purified by heating on fire and sprinkling with water;—same with cooked
food enough for lasting one day, when defiled by dogs and crows, or by
the presence of hair and insects.’

*Baudhāyana* (Do., p. 268).—‘Finding skin, hair or nails in the food,
one shall throw about a handful of it, and sprinkling water and
scattering ashes over it, again sprinkling water, one may eat it after
having obtained the recommendation of Brāhmaṇas.’
