+++
title = "130 नित्यम् आस्यम्"

+++
*Baudhāyana* (1.9, 2).—‘A calf is pure in making the milk flow; a bird
in the dropping of fruits, women at the time of dalliance and a dog in
catching a deer.’

*Sumantu* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 145).—‘Women, infants, mosquitoes, flies,
cats, rats, shadow, seats, beds, conveyances and water-particles are
always pure.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 145).—‘Of Brāhmaṇas, the feet are pure;
of goats and horses, the mouth; of cows, the hind-part is pure; of
women, the whole body.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (28.8).—‘A calf is pure for the flowing of milk; a bird when
it causes a fruit to fall, women during dalliance, and a dog when it
catches a deer.’

*Uśanas* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 144).—‘The cow is pure at the hind-part,
the goat and other at the front; women are pure all over; but their
heart is impure.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.45, 47).—‘Wild animals killed by dogs and fruits thrown by
birds, what has been spoilt by children and what has been handled by
women,...the Lord of Created Beings has declared these to be pure.’

*Viṣṇu* (23.49).—‘The mouth of the woman is always pure, a bird is pure
in the dropping of fruits; a sucking calf in the flowing of milk; and a
dog in the catching of deer.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.187, 192-195).—‘The woman’s mouth is pure...... So is
the deer’s flesh dropped by dogs, Caṇḍālas, carnivorous animals and
others...... Sun’s rays, fire, goat, shadow, cow, horse, earth, air,
liquid particles and flies are pure for touching; and the calf is pure
in making the milk flow. The goat and the horse are pure in their mouth,
but not so the cow, nor the excretions from human bodies. Roads are
purified by the rays of the sun and the moon and by wind; particles
issuing from the mouth are pure, so also water dropped during sipping
water and the hairs of the moustache in the mouth.’

*Yama* (Aparārka, p. 274).—‘Seat, bed, conveyance, woman’s mouth,
blanket, and razor,—these and the sacrificial cups, the wise never
regard as defiled. The following are always pure to the touch:—cow,
horse, liquid particles, shadow, flies, locusts, parrots, goat,
elephant, martial umbrella, solar and lunar rays, earth, lire, dust,
air, water, curd, clarified butter, milk.’

*Śaṅkha* (Do.).—‘Smoke, fire and dust wafted by the wind, are pure.’

*Brahmapurāṇa* (Do.).—‘The mouth of one’s wife during.dalliance and of
the infant just born are pure.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘Goats and horses arc pure in their mouth, cows are pure
in their hind-part, trees are pure when in flower; Brāhmaṇas are always
pure.’

*Śivadharmottara* (Do.).—‘Brāhmaṇa, cow, flies, perspiration, shadow,
lire, sun’s rays, dust, earth, air,—are pure in touching...... The
shadow cast by the Caṇḍāla and the out cast is never defiling to the
touch.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Parāśaramādhava, p. 145).—‘Woman’s mouth during
dalliance.’

*Parāśara* (7.35).—‘Unimpeded currents are never impure, nor dust raised
by the wind; women, old persons and children are never impure.’
