+++
title = "138 कृत्वा मूत्रम्"

+++
*Gautama* (1.35, 36, 44).—‘Turning his face to the east or to the north,
he shall purify himself from personal defilement—seated in a pure place,
placing his right arm between his knees, arranging his dress (and sacred
thread) in the manner required for a sacrifice to the gods, he shall,
after washing his hands up to the wrist, three or four times, silently
sip water reaching his heart; twice wipe his lips; sprinkle his head and
feet; touch the cavities in the head with the right hand; and place it
on the crown of his head (and on the navel) on passing urine or
faeces... water should be sipped.’

*Baudhāyana* (l.8.26).—‘After sipping water, he shall touch the cavities
of the head with water, also the feet, the navel, the head and the left
hand.’

*Āpastamba* (1.16.2-7).—‘Sitting, he shall sip water (for purification)
thrice, the water penetrating his heart; he shall wipe his lips three
times;—some declare that he shall do this twice; he shall then touch his
lips once;—twice, according to some; having sprinkled water on his left
hand with his right, he shall touch both his feet, and his head and
organs, eyes, nose and ears.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.27-29).—‘He shall twice wipe his mouth; he shall touch the
cavities with water; he shall pour water on his head and on the left
hand.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.75).—‘Having sneezed, slept or eaten, going to eat or to
study, having drunk water, having bathed or spat or put on his garments,
or walked on the high road, or discharged urine or faeces, or touched
dry bones of a five-toed animal, he should sip water.’

*Viṣṇu* (62.7-8).—‘Let him wipe his lips twice; let him touch the
cavities above the navel, his head and his chest with water.’
