+++
title = "141 नोच्छिष्टङ् कुर्वते"

+++
*Viṣṇu* (23.53).—‘Such drops as fall from the mouth of a man upon any
part of his body do not render it impure; nor do hairs of the beard that
enter his month; nor remnants of food adhering to his teeth.’

*Gautama* (1.38-41).—‘Remnants of food adhering to the teeth are as his
teeth (and do not make him impure), except if he touches them with the
tongue; or before they fall from their place, according to some people;
if they do become detached, he should know that he is purified by merely
swallowing them, like saliva; drops of saliva dropping from the mouth do
not cause impurity, except when they fall on a limb of the body.’

*Baudhāyana* (1.8.24, 25).—‘What adheres to the teeth should be regarded
like the teeth; because it is fixed like the teeth. Let him not sip
water on their account in case it falls; if it flows out, he shall be
pure. They quote the following:—“If anything adheres to the teeth, it is
pure like the teeth; and if he swallows it, or whatever else may be in
the mouth, or may remain there after he has sipped water, he will become
pure.”’

*Āpastamba* (1.16.11-13).—‘He does not become impure by the hair of his
moustache getting into his mouth, as long as he does not touch them with
his hand; if drops of saliva are perceived to fall from his mouth, then
he shall sip water; some people declare that if the saliva falls on the
ground, he need not sip water.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.37).—‘Drops of saliva falling from the mouth, which do not
touch a limb of the body, do not make a man impure.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.195).—‘Drops issuing from the mouth are pure; so also
the water dropped in sipping water; and the hair of the moustache
entering one’s mouth; if anything adheres to the teeth, the man becomes
pure by throwing it out.’

*Śaṅkha* (Aparārka, p. 277).—‘What adheres to the teeth is like the
teeth, when it is devoid of any taste,—except when it is touched by the
tongue.’

*Devala* (Do.).—‘What adheres to the teeth and cannot be taken out
should be regarded as the teeth; and he should not make much effort to
take it out, as if the sticks used wounded him, he would become very
impure.’
