+++
title = "145 सुप्त्वा क्षुत्वा"

+++
*Gautama* (1.374.—‘On sleeping, dining, and sneezing, he shall again sip
water.’

*Āpastamba* (1.16.14).—‘On touching during sleep or sternutation, the
effluvia of the nose or the eyes, or touching

blood, hair, fire, kine, a Brāhmaṇa or a woman, and after having walked
on the high road, and after having touched an impure thing or man, and
after having put on his lower garment, he shall either bathe or sip or
merely touch water.’

*Vaśiṣṭha* (3.38).—‘If, after having sipped water, he sleeps, eats,
sneezes, drinks, weeps or bathes, or puts on a dress, he must again sip
water.’

*Viṣṇu* (22.75)—‘Having sneezed, slept, and eaten, or going to eat and
to study, or having drunk water, bathed, spat, or having put on his
garment, walked on the high road, discharged urine or faeces, touched
dry hone of five-toed animals—he must sip water.’

*Gobhila* (1.2.33).—‘Having slept or eaten or sneezed or taken a bath or
drunk something or changed his garments or walked on the high road or
gone to a crematorium,—he should sip water again and again.’

*Yājñavalkya* (1.196).—‘Having bathed or drunk, or sneezing or sleeping
or passing along the road, or after putting on a garment, he shall sip
water again, even though he may have already sipped water.’

*Baudhāyana* (Aparārka, p. 278).—‘On the cloth-knot becoming loose, if
he re-ties it, he shall sip water; or he may touch moist earth, cowdung
or grass.’

*Āpastamba* (Do.).—‘When going to eat, he shall sip water.’

*Pracetas* (Do.).—‘On urinating, passing faeces, spitting or lying, he
shall sip water again.’

*Paiṭhīnasi* (Do.).—‘On the approach of an asthmatic fit and on passing
a road-crossing, he shall sip water again.’

*Hārīta* (Do., p. 279).—‘When going to sleep, he shall sip water.’

*Parāśara* (Aparārka, p. 780).—‘On sneezing, or spitting, or
food-remnant adhering to the teeth, on lying, and on conversing with
outcasts, one shall touch the right car.’

*Vṛddha-Śātātapa* (Aparārka, p. 780).—‘On passing wind, having spat, on
throwing out a tooth, on sneezing, and on conversing with an outcast,
one shall touch the right ear.’

*Bṛhaspati* (Parāśaramādhava-Ācāra, p. 224).—‘On passing wind, on
weeping, on becoming angry, on touching a cat or a rat, on laughing, on
lying, one should sip water.’

*Kūrmapurāṇa* (Do., p. 225).—‘After having taken his food, he shall sip
water twice; on touching his hairless lips, on putting on clothes, on
passing semen, faeces or urine, on improper speaking, on yawning, when
going to study, on the approach of an asthmatic ñt, on passing through a
road-crossing or a crematorium,—and also during the two twilights,—the
Brāhmaṇa shall sip water, even though he may have sipped it already.’
