+++
title = "052 फलन् त्व्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 579), which explains the
meaning to be:—‘In a case where the owner of the field and the sower of
the seed are not parties to an agreement, the benefit accrues to the
former and not to the latter.’

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 3?0), which adds the
following explanation:—In a case where the ‘field-owner’ and the
‘seed-owner’ have entered into an agreement that ‘the child born would
belong to both of us,’ the child that is bora of the connection between
the former’s wife and the latter shall belong to both; but where there
has been no such agreement, and yet the latter ‘sows his seed’ in the
former’s ‘field,’ and a child is bora, it will belong to the
‘field-owner,’ and not to the ‘seed-owner;’ because the ‘receptacle’ is
more potent than the ‘seed,’ as is found in the case of the cow, the
sheep and other animals.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 656), which adds that
‘*phalānabhisandhāna*’ means the ‘absence of any such agreement as that
the child horn of this connection shall belong to both of us;’so that
the son thus born would be ‘*kṣetraja*’ and not ‘*dvyāmuṣyāyaṇa*.’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.127), which adds a note the exact wording
of which has been reproduced in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 350)
\[see above\]. *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the following explanation of the verbal
construction:—‘*Kṣeṭriṇām bījinām*,’ ‘from among field-owners and
seed-owners,’ if either party has not agreed to the understanding
regarding the lending of the ‘field,’ then the child born belongs to the
‘field-owner;’ and the reason for this lies in the fact that ‘the
receptacle is more potent than the seed’;—and the reason for this is
declared to be ‘*pratyakṣam*,’ ‘ordinary perception’, *i*. *e*., such is
actually found to be the case in ordinary experience;—the ‘*phalam*’
spoken of in the text stands for the *agreement* regarding the child;—it
goes on to add that according to Medhātithi this verse serves to point
out the special circumstance under which the ‘benefit does not accrue to
the seed-sower,’ which has been stated in general terms in the preceding
verse.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 653);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra, 185b), which adds the following explanation—‘In a case where
there has been no agreement regarding the *phala*, *i.e*., the expected
offspring,—the child belongs to the woman’s husband, just as we find in
the case where, without the knowledge or consent of the owner of the
field, if some one sows his own seeds in that field, the outturn of the
field belongs to the owner of the field, and not to that of the seeds.


