+++
title = "053 क्रियाभ्युपगमात् त्व्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣara* (2.127) which adds the following
explanation:—In a case where the ‘field’ is lent to the seed-owner for
sowing, on the mutual understanding that the child born would belong to
both parties, both of them will be owners of the child, as has been
(*dṛṣṭa*) held by the great sages.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 656), which adds that the
term ‘*kriyā*’ here stands for the agreement that ‘the child born would
belong’ to both of us;’ and adds that it is only sons born under these
conditions that can be called ‘*Dvyāmuṣyāyaṇa*.’

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 350), which adds the
following explanation:—‘In a case where the owner of the field lends his
field to the owner of the seed, after entering into an agreement with
him to the effect that the child born shall belong to both,—the child is
held to belong to both the parties.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 557), which adds that this rule
applies also to the case where the ‘seed-owner’ concerned may already
have sons of his own;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p..653);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra 38a);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra,
185b), which adds the following explanation:—A man has agricultural
land, and another has, the seed-grains,—the two enter into an agreement
‘let us, combine our resources and cultivate the land conjointly and the
out turn shall belong to both of us,’—in this case the crop belongs to
both; similarly when the husband of the wife enters into an agreement
with another man that ‘you beget a child on my wife and the child shall
belong to both of us,’ the child that is born belongs to both, and
having two fathers, he is called ‘*Dvyāṃvṣyāyaṇa*.’


