+++
title = "059 देवराद् वा"

+++
**(verses 9.59-60)  
**

‘*Santānasya*’—‘Son, and also the appointed daughter’
(Medhātithi);—‘Son’ (Govindarāja and Rāghavānanda).

“This practice is forbidden in Āpastamba 2.27.2-7; if the husband is
alive; but with the widow, it is expressly enjoined by Gautama 78.4 and
28.21-22, and Vaśiṣṭha 17.56. Nārada gives an elaborate account of the
formalities. See Jolly, Recht. Stellung S. 18, where the passage is
discussed.”—Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.127) as propounding the practice
of ‘*niyoga*’ for the purpose of forbidding it under verse 64 *et
seq*.—*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the notes:—‘*Samyak*,’ in accordance with the
scriptures,—‘*īpsitā*,’ in the form of a son,—‘*kṣaye*,’ in the event of
threatened extinction of the family; this means that the practice is
sanctioned only under very abnormal circumstances;—‘*vāg-yataḥ*,’
silent;—it then goes on to quote Medhātithi.

\(59\) is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 445)—and both the verses in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 350); and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra,
p. 737) which remarks that the term ‘*vidhavā*’ in this verse stands for
the girl whose betrothed husband has died after the betrothal, but
*before* actual marriage.

Both verses are quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 700);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 38a);—and in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra,
pp. 224-225), which explains the meaning as—“The widow, when directed by
the father-in-law or other elders, may beget a desired (*i.e*., male)
child from her husband’s (elder or younger) brother,—but only one;
although some people hold that she may secure two sons.’


