+++
title = "064 नाऽन्यस्मिन् विधवा"

+++
“Verses 64-68 flatly contradict the rules given in the preceding ones.
But it by no means follows that they are a modern addition, as held by
Hopkins. For the same view is expressed by Āpastamba, 2.27.2-6, and was
held, according to Baudhāyana, 2.3.34, by Aupajandhani. Moreover,
Bṛhaspati Smṛti states expressly (Colebrook Dig. CLVII) that the
contradictory statement occurred in the Mānava Dharmaśātra as known to
the author.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.136), as prohibiting
*niyoga*;—again under 2.127, to the same effect, where *Bālambhaṭṭī*
adds that ‘*anyasmin*’ means ‘other than the husband.’

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 737), which remarks that
the term ‘*vidhavā*’ here stands for the woman, whose husband has died
after the marriage has been performed;—then it seeks to reconcile the
apparent contradiction between verses 59 and 60 (permitting *Niyoga*) on
the one hand, and verses 64-68 (forbidding it) on the other; the
sanction is meant for the girl who is widowed after verbal betrothal,
before marriage; while the prohibition applies to one who is widowed
after marriage; this, it adds, is made clear by verse 65, which refers
to the ‘mantras recited during the marriage-ceremony.’ It concludes
therefore that there is no room for any doubts regarding the opinion of
Manu, adumbrated in *Mitākṣarā*.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 38a);—in *Smṛticandrikā*
(Saṃskāra, p. 226), which says that this prohibition is meant for the
*Kali-age*;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 186a).


