+++
title = "069 यस्या म्रियेत"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (1.69), as enunciating the view that
the sanction of the ‘*kṣeṭraja*’ son pertains only to those cases where
the bridegroom has died after the verbal betrothal;—again under 2.127,
as describing the case in which alone ‘*niyoga*’ is permissible;—and it
adds that this verse implies that the man to whom a girl has been
betrothed has become her ‘husband’ even before the marriage rites have
been performed.

*Mitākṣarā* adds the following notes:—When the ‘husband’ to whom the
girl has been betrothed dies, then his ‘own’ *i.e*., uterine brother,
elder or younger, ‘*vindeta*,’ shall take her, *i.e*., marry her. It
construes ‘*anena vidhānena*’ with the next verse.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 129), to the effect that the child
born under this rule belongs to the person to whom the girl had been
previously betrothed;—in *Aparārka* (p. 78), which also notes that this
verse serves to restrict the sanction of ‘*niyoga*’ or of ‘marriage of
widows’ to cases of mere *betrothal*, not of actual *marriage*;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 351), to the same effect; and it adds
that for this reason the foregoing conflicting verses 59-68 should not
be understood as setting forth two optional alternatives;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 737), to the effect that ‘*niyoga*’ does
not mean mere *intercourse*, without marriage, it means *marriage* and
then intercourse;—and again on p. 756, as laying down the marrying of
the girl by her younger brother-in-law, on the death of her (betrothed)
husband.

This verse is quoted also in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, 38a).


