+++
title = "070 यथाविध्य् अधिगम्यैनाम्"

+++
This verse is quoted along with 69 in *Mitākṣarā* (2.127), which adds
the following notes:—‘*Yathāvidhi*,’ in accordance with the
scriptures,—‘*adhigamya*’, having married,—‘*anena vidhānena*,’ (of the
preceding verse) *i.e*., ‘besmearing himself with clarified butter, with
speech held in check and so forth’,—‘*śuklavastrām śucivratām*,’ with
her mind and body under full control,—‘*mithaḥ*,’ in secret,—shall
approach her once during each course, till conception takes place. It
proceeds to declare that all this does not make the woman the actual
‘wife’ of the brother-in-law; hence the child bora of this union belongs
to the real (*i.e*., the former) husband;—*Bālambhaṭṭī* adds that the
action of the brother-in-law is purely for the purpose of providing a
child for his dead brother; it goes on to add the following notes
Kullūka Bhaṭṭa remarks that the fact of the child born of the
intercourse here sanctioned belonging to the dead betrothed is clear
from the restriction imposed, that there is to be intercourse only
*once* during the course, and that also only until conception takes
place.—Having thus stated the view of the older writers, *Bālambhaṭṭī*
enters into a long discussion and comes to the conclusion that the
sanction of remarriage must refer to a regular *widow*—who loses her
real husband after full marriage, and not only after betrothal; and it
naively remarks that the opinion of the older writers is due to
prejudice against ‘*niyoga*,’ by reason of its having been forbidden
during the *Kaliyuga*.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* (II, p. 129), which also quotes Kullūka
Bhaṭṭa’s remark (quoted in *Bālambhaṭṭī* above). It goes on to add that
what is here laid down should be done only if the woman concerned is
willing to do it, not otherwise; as is clearly declared by Vaśiṣṭha.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 351);—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 737).


