+++
title = "080 मद्यपासाधुवृत्ता च"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 508), which
explains ‘*vyādhitā*’ as ‘suffering from a long lingering disease—in
*Madanapārijāta* (p. 188), which adds the following notes:—‘*Madyapā*’,
the woman who is addicted to drinking what is forbidden for the caste to
which she belongs,—‘*asatyavṛttā*,’ whose conduct is not
good,—‘*pratikūlā*,’ in the habit of doing tilings disagreeable to her
husband and of beating her children, servants and others,—‘*arthaghnī*,’
prone, through idleness, to wasting money,—‘*adhivedana*’ means the
taking of another wife.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 100), which adds the note that
‘*vyādhitā*’ means suffering from a lingering disease;—it quotes this
verse in support of the view that what is meant to be a ground for
superseding the wife is not the drinking of *liquor*, but the drinking
of any intoxicant; the drinking of wine being one of the ‘serious’ sins,
it would make the woman liable to be renounced, and not only superseded.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 871), whieh adds that
‘*Madyapā*’ here has been held by older writers to refer only to women
of the twice-born castes; but in reality it refers to all the four
castes, for all of whom the drinking of all the three kinds of
‘wine’—*Gauḍī*, *Mādhvī* and *Paiṣṭī*—is forbidden;—‘*asatyavṛttā*’ is
ill-behaved or untruthful;—‘*pratikūlā*,’ acting in ways injurious to
her husband;—‘*vyādhitā*,’ suffering from such diseases as render her
unfit for household work;—‘*hiṃsrā*’, addicted to beating children and
maidservants;—‘*arthaghnī*’, ‘prone to wasting the wealth
acquired;’—‘*sarvadā*’ is to be construed as qualifying ‘*asatyavṛttā*’
and the other epithets,—the meaning being the wife who is *always*
untruthful.

It is quoted in *Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 592), which explains
‘*vyādhitā*’ as a ‘confirmed invalid.’


