+++
title = "094 त्रिंशद्वर्षो वहेत्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 766), which says
that the following is the upshot of the texts bearing on this
subject:—If the age of the girl is 8 years or less, she should be
married to a man whose age is three times that of hers; if it is between
8 and 12, the age of the bidegroom should two and a half times;—if her
age is between 12 and 16 then that of the bridegroom shall be two years
less than the double of her age. Of the sentence ‘*dharme sīdati
satvaraḥ*,’ it gives two explanations:—(*a*) if he finds that his
religious duties would otherwise suffer, he may marry earlier; and (*b*)
if he marries in haste,—*i.e*., if he marries before he has reached the
prescribed age, or if he marries a girl whose age is lower than the one
prescribed,—then he suffers in spiritual merit

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Ācāra, p. 474), as laying down the
extent to which the bride should be younger than the bridegroom;—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 121), which adds that this verse
applies to cases where the girl has not menstruated upto 12 years;—in
*Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 215);—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 82), which explains
‘*tryaṣṭavarṣaḥ*’ as ‘twenty-four years old’;—in *Hemādri* (Kāla, p.
801);—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 112), which explains ‘*satvara*’
as ‘one of lower age,’ and deduces the conclusion that there is nothing
wrong if the girl is married before her menstruation;—and in
*Gadādharapaddhati* (Kāla, p. 222), which explains ‘*satvaraḥ*’ as one
who is in a hurry to enter the Householder’s stage.’


