+++
title = "104 ऊर्ध्वम् पितुश्"

+++
“The father’s estate is to be divided after the father’s death, and the
mother’s estate after the mother’s death’ (Kullūka Rāghavānanda,
Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).—‘The mother’s estate devolves on the sons, only
on failure of daughters’. (Nārāyaṇa).—The word ‘*ūrdhvam*’ indicates by
implication that the rule holds good in the case of the father’s turning
an ascetic (Rāghavānanda).—The equal division takes place if the eldest
does not desire to receive an additional share (Kullūka).—The last
clause shows that division of the property may take place with the
parents’ permission during their lifetime. (Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and
Rāghavānanda).”—Buhler.

Of the Bhāṣya on this verse we have a single short sentence; on the next
verse it is wanting in all the Mss. hitherto found; so also on several
other important verses bearing on inheritance. It seems it has been
purposely destroyed by the ‘Editors’ who reconstructed the Bhāṣya under
King Madana. And from the fact that the pruning knife began to operate
with the verse dealing with the rule regarding the larger share of the
eldest brother, one feels justified in assuming that the conclusion
arrived at on this point by Medhātithi was detrimental to the interests
of the said King, who therefore set himself systematically to collecting
all available Mss. of the work and destroying this portion.—In the
absence of some such strong motive, one fails to see why the King should
have taken all this trouble regarding the ‘reconstruction’ of
Medhātithi’s commentary.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 455), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Samam*’, equal, there being no setting aside of the
twentieth part (for the eldest brother).—It might be argued that since
Manu has himself laid down that the twentieth part should be set aside
as the additional share for the eldest brother, when they are dividing
the paternal estate after the father’s death, why should he speak of
‘equal shares’?—But the fact of the matter is that the said additional
share is meant only for those cases where the eldest brother happens to
possess special qualifications.—*Udayakara* has however explained the
present verse to mean that what of is to be divided into ‘equal’ shares
is only that part of the property which remains after setting aside the
said twentieth part.—Halāyudha and Pārijāta have read ‘*saha*’ in place
of ‘*samam*’ and Pārijāta has explained it as ‘among themselves’.—The
term ‘*paitṛkam*’ is to be expounded as ‘*mātā ca pitā ca pitarau, tayoḥ
idam paitṛkam*’; so that the ‘mother’s estate’ also becomes included,—so
says Halāyudha.—Though the text uses the term ‘*paitṛkam riktham*’,
‘father’s estate’, it is meant to include the estate of the grandfather
and other forefathers also; in which latter also the brothers have
shares.—Though it is true that both the father’s and the mother’s estate
are meant, yet it has to be borne in mind that to the mother’s estate,
the sons are entitled only in the absence of a daughter or her
descendants.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 41), which adds that even though
the text repeats the particle ‘*ca*’, yet it does not mean that *both*
the parents should die before the property is divided.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p, 326), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Pituḥ ūrdhvam*’, this phrase indicates the time for
the division of the *father’s* property; and ‘*mātuḥ ūrdhvam*’ indicates
that for the division of the *mother’s* property; thus the meaning of
the verse comes to this:—On the death of the Father, his estate is to be
partitioned, even though the Mother may be living; similarly on the
death of the Mother, her estate is to be partitioned, even though the
Father may be living; there being no reason why the partition of the
estate of the one should await the death of the other.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 443);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi*
(Calcutta, p. 124) which has the following notes;—‘*Samam*’,
equal,—*i.e*., without setting apart 20 per cent for the eldest;—it
might be argued that Manu has actually sanctioned 20 per cent, as the
special share of the eldest brother, in connection with the partition
that is done after the Father’s death;—but this sanction should be taken
as referring either to cases where the eldest brother has very special
qualifications, or where he is specially desirous of having a special
share;—it explains the mention of the ‘mother’ as being due to the term
‘*paitṛkam*’ meaning ‘parental’, and hence including the mother’s
property also, which can be partitioned only after the death of the
‘mother.’

It is quoted in *Smṛtisāroddhāra* (p. 331);—in *Dāyakramasaṅgraha*;—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 170a), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Paitṛkam*’, belonging to *the Father* and *the Mother*; the
sense being that the Father’s property is to be divided after the
Father’s death, find the Mother’s property after the Mother’s death;—the
particle ‘*ca*’ does not imply that ‘after the death of both the parents
is another time for partition’; for the simple reason that the Mother or
the Father being alive can be no obstacle in the partitioning of the
property of the other;—and in *Jīmūtavāhana* (Dāyabhāga, p. 23), which
says that this verse is meant to answer the question ‘why the sons
should not partition the property during the life-time of the
parents’?—the reason being that during that time they have no
proprietary right over it.


