+++
title = "112 ज्येष्ठस्य विंश"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.114), which notes that this
unequal division pertains to eases where the Father himself is dividing
his *self-acquired* property among his sons,—no such division being
permissible regarding ancestral property.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 645), which supplies the following
explanation:—The twentieth part of the property going to be divided, as
also the *best* thing among the articles, should be given to the eldest
brother; to the second brother, the fortieth part of the estate and also
an article of the second quality; and to the youngest brother, the
eightieth part of the estate and a third-rate article; the property that
remains after this is to be divided equally;—it goes on to add that,
though this unequal division has been sanctioned by several texts, yet
it should never be adopted in practice, as it is contrary to popular
sentiment, and what is against popular sentiment should not be done.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 468), along with the next two
verses which adds the following notes.—This deduction of special shares
pertains to cases where the eldest brother is endowed with superior
qualifications;—the law on this point may be thus summed up: In a case
where there are several sons born of the same mother, and every one is
endowed with qualities,—but there is a gradual inferiority in the
qualities,—then the eldest brother should receive as his special share,
the twentieth part out of the whole property, as also the best among the
articles in the property; the second brother is to receive half of that,
*i.e*., the fortieth part, and also one article of the second quality;
and the youngest brother, the eightieth part, and also an article of the
lowest quality;—when however the eldest and the youngest alone are
possessed of superior qualities, then the said special shares are to be
given to these two only, the second brother receiving only his ordinary
share, the special share prescribed for the *qualified* second
brother—*i.e*., the fortieth pari of the property,—being equally divided
among the throe;—in a case where there are several brothers between the
oldest and the youngest, and many of them are possessed of superior
qualities, each one of the middle brothers is to receive a fortieth part
as his special share;—when the eldest brother is possessed of very
superior qualities, while the others are entirely devoid of qualities,
he shall take as his special share the best among the articles,—the best
of every kind of articles, *e.g*., ruby among the gems and so forth,—and
also one among each kind of cows, buffaloes and other cattle.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 43);—in the *Smṛtitattva* II (p.
193);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 128), which notes on p. 125
that this refers to cases where the elder brother is endowed with
special qualifications, or where he is specially desirous of having the
extra share;—in *Smṛtisāroddhāra*, (p. 331), which says that this refers
to the property acquired by the father when he divides it among his sons
during his own life-time;—and by *Jīmūtavāhana* (Dāyabhāga, p. 64), who
says that equal partition is to be made after all these ‘special shares’
have been extracted, as is made clear by verse 116; the special share of
the eldest brother being the twentieth part of the property along with
the ‘best article’.


