+++
title = "118 स्वेभ्यो ऽंशेभ्यस्"

+++
‘If there are several brothers find only one sister, the former must
deduct from their several shares as much money as will make up the
fourth part of one brother’s share’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 731), which adds the following
notes ‘*Svebhyoṃśebhyaḥ*’ means ‘from out of the share of one brother’;
the plural number is used in view of the plurality of daughters;—‘*svāt
svāt*’, the repetition is in reference to daughters of diverse
castes;—thus the meaning comes to be as follows:—When a Brāhmaṇa has
wives of all the four castes, and each of these has daughters, then the
daughter born of the Brāhmaṇa wife is to receive the fourth part of the
share accruing to the son of the Brahmaṇa wife; similarly the daughter
of the Kṣatriya wife is to receive the fourth part of the share of the
son of the Kṣatriya wife. This however, is not the sister’s ‘*rightful*
inheritance’.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.124), which adds the following
explanation:—The Brāhmaṇa-sons should give to the Brāhmaṇa-daughters the
fourth part of the share that accrues to them in accordance with their
castes,—whereby 4 parts go to the Brāhmaṇa, etc. (see verse 153 below);
it does not mean that each brother should give a fourth part out of his
own share; what is meant is that the daughter of a certain caste is to
receive the fourth part of what is prescribed as the share of the son of
that caste;—the last clause ‘*patitāḥ syuraditsavaḥ*’ indicates the
obligatory character of the rule. For this same reason it is not right
to hold that all that the daughter is to receive is money enough for her
marriage. It goes on to add that the explanation provided by Asahāya and
Medhātitha is the right one. Thus it is decided that after the father’s
death, the daughter is actually *entitled* to a share.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 494), which adds the following
explanation:—It does not mean that the brother should take out a fourth
part of his own share and give it to his sister; what is meant is that
the daughter of a certaind (certain?) caste is to receive the fourth
part of what is prescribed as the share of the son of that caste; which
thus is to be given to her, for the purpose of her marriage. Thus the
meaning comes to be that out of the ‘four shares’ and the ‘three shares’
to which the sons of the Brāhmaṇa wife and those of the Kṣatriya wife
respectively are entitled,—out of the combined total of these—a ‘fourth
part’ shall be given to the daughter; so that while it is the ‘fourth
part’ that is to be given, the real purpose of this gift is to enable
her marriage to be performed. Such is the view of Viṣṇu, the *Kalpataru*
and the *Mitākṣarā*; while Halāyadha holds the opinion that no stress is
meant to be laid on the ‘fourth part’, all that is meant is that the
daughter is to receive what would be needed for the performance of her
marriage. And this is the view that appears to be most proper; for
whatever the ‘fourth part’ may be, the performance of the marriage would
be necessary in any case.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 345), which supplies
the following notes:—The meaning is that the brother belonging to the
Brāhmaṇa and other castes should each give to the sisters of the
Brāhmaṇa and other castes, the fourth part of his own share; that is to
say, (*a*) in a case where a man has only one wife, and that of the
Brāhmaṇa caste, and from her he has one son and one daughter,—the son
shall divide his father’s property into two parts, and having divided
one of these two parts into four parts, he shall give one of these four
parts to his sister and take the rest for himself;—when there are two
sons and one daughter, the property shall be divided into three parts,
and one of these three parts being divided into four parts, one of these
four parts is to go to the daughter, and the rest the two sons shall
divide between themselves;—when there is one son and two daughters, the
father’s property shall be divided into three parts, and one of these
three parts being divided into four parts, two of these latter parts
shall be given to the two daughters, and the rest shall be taken by the
son.—(*b*) But in a case where the man has left one son of the Brāhmaṇa
wife and one daughter of the Kṣatriya wife,—the father’s property shall
be divided into *seven* parts (‘four shares’ accruing to the Brāhmaṇa
son and ‘three shares’ to the Kṣatriya son), if there be one, the ‘three
shares’ (accruing to the Kṣatriya son) shall be divided into four parts,
one of these four parts shall be given to the Kṣatriya daughter, the
rest of the property going to the Brāhmaṇa son; where there are two
Brāhmaṇa sons and one Kṣatriya daughter the father’s property is to be
divided into *eleven* parts (4 shares for each of the Brāhmaṇa sons and
three for the Kṣatriya if there be one), and the three parts (accruing
to the Kṣatriya son) being divided into four parts, one of these four
parts shall go to the *Kṣatriya* daughter, and the rest of the property
shall be divided between the two Brāhmaṇa sons. On the same principle is
partition to proceed when there are brothers of different castes or
sisters in varying numbers; such is the explanation provided by
Medhātithi, and approved by Vijñāneśwara also;—Bhāruci on the other hand
holds that the ‘fourth share’ only stands for ‘such amount as may be
necessary for her marriage,’ and that therefore unmarried girls have no
*right* to the inheritance as such. This same view has been held also by
the author of the *Candrikā*,—of these two views, people may accept the
one that appears to be the most reasonable.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra, p. 36a);—in
*Vivādacintāmani* (Calcutta, p. 134), which says that the meaning is
that ‘each daughter should receive the fourth part of what forms the
share of a son of the same caste as himself,’ and adds that stress is
not meant to be laid upon the ‘fourth part,’ what is meant is that so
much should be given to her as would suffice for her marriage;—and in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra, 179b), which says that this does *not* mean
that ‘in the case of either form of partition among the brothers, each
brother should give to the sister a fourth part of his share’; as, if
there were so, if there are several brothers to a single sister, she
would have a very large property,—or if there were a single brother to
many sisters, he would have nothing left for himself;—all therefore that
is meant is that the brother should give to the sisters just enough to
suffice for her marriage—so says the Vivādaratnākara, the
Vivādacintāmaṇi and the rest;—this is not right; as the text is clear on
the point that by not giving to the sister the fourth part of his share,
the brother incurs a sin which is quite different from that incurred in
not providing for her marriage; the right explanation is that which has
been provided by Medhātithi and the Mitākṣarā. (It then proceeds to
quote these).

It is quoted by *Jīmūtavāhana* (Dāyabhāga, p. 114), which says that the
root ‘*dā*’ used makes it clear that the sisters have no *claims* over
the property.

This verse is quoted in *Mitālṣarā* (2. 119), to the effect that of the
animals mentioned, if an odd one remains after partition, it is to be
given to the qldest brother;—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 686), to the same
effect;—in *Aparārka* (p. 723), which explains ‘*viṣamam*’ as a number
different from (not a multiple of) the number of brothers;—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 498), which says that the odd animals are not to
be partitioned by being sold and the value divided, they should be taken
by the eldest brother;—and in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 57).


