+++
title = "124 ज्येष्ठस् तु"

+++
Medhātithi reads ‘*ajyeṣṭhāyām*’ and remarks that it is another ‘special
share but it adds that this may be only another special share for the
son of the *senior* wife (the reading in this case being *jyeṣṭhāyām*)

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 473), which reads
‘*Jyeṣṭhāyām*’ and remarks that this lays down another special share for
the brother who is ‘elder’ by reason of being born of the senior
wife.—‘*Vṛṣabhaṣoḍaśaḥ*’ means ‘cows that have a bull for their
sixteenth’, these *cows* being the animals that are most cognate to the
animal mentioned, ‘bull—‘*Śeṣāḥ*’, the remaining brothers, by reason of
the non-seniority of their mothers, should each take a bull which is not
the very best.—It goes on to add that, according to the author of the
*Prākāśa*, what is here stated by Manu is the opinion of ‘others’,—his
own view being stated in the next verse, where seniority among brothers
is made to rest upon the priority of their birth.—Halāyudha however
explains the three verses (122-124) as follows:—When the younger brother
is born of the senior and the elder from the junior wife, then the
former shall have the best bull as his ‘special share’,—of the other
bulls, which are not the very best, one each should be given to the
other brothers, the quality of each being in accordance with the
respective seniority of their mothers,—and the remainder is to be
divided equally among the brothers (123);—but when the elder brother is
born of the senior wife, then we have the rule laid down in 124: the
cows ‘with a bull as their sixteenth’ goes to the eldest brother, and
each of the other brothers receives as his ‘special share’ one bull, the
quality of which is to be determined by the relative seniority of their
mothers.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 461).


