+++
title = "126 जन्मज्येष्ठेन चाह्वानम्"

+++
For the ‘*Subrahmaṇyā* verses’ see Aitareya Brāhmaṇa 6.3.

According to Rāghavānanda the meaning of the second half is that since
between twins the one born first is the last conceived, the right of
primogeniture is given to the son *born* last. This is the view hinted
at by a passage in the *Uttaracarita*, where Lava says of his brother
‘*prasvakrameṇa sa kīla jyāyān*.’ (Act IV).

This verse is quoted in *Vīramitrodya* (Rājanīti, p. 37), which adds the
following notes—That *mantra* is called ‘*Subrahmaṇyā*’ which, at the
Jyotiṣṭoma sacrifice, is recited for inviting Indra; in this the
‘eldest’ son is represented as addressing the father; and it is the
senior by *birth* that is regarded as the ‘eldest’; and in a case where
the sacrificer has twin sons, even though the conception of both may
have been simultaneous, yet the son that is *born* first is held to be
the ‘eldest’; this is the made clear by a text of Devala’s where it is
declared that of twins, that child is to be regarded as the ‘elder’
whose face is seen first In the Saṃskāra section we find the other view
stated (see below).

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 477), which has the following
notes—The ‘*Subrahmaṇyā*’ is the mantra recited at the Jyotiṣṭoma by
*Chandoyas*, when the form employed is ‘so and so, the father of so and
so is sacrificing’; and here it is the elder son that is named; and he
is the one that is *born* first.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 161), which adds the
following notes:—Between twins seniority is determined by birth *in the
womb*; *i.e*., that child is ‘elder’ who is the first to be born in the
mother’s womb; while the one born, *i.e*. conceived, later is regarded
as *junior*; and it is not that seniority belongs to the child that
*comes out* of the womb first; this conclusion is based on the fact that
the child born later has been *conceived* earlier and would have been
*born earlier* also, had not its passage outside been obstructed by the
second child conceived later; the order of conception being the reverse
of that of birth. It is only when both children are *born
simultaneously* that seniority belongs to one whose face the father sees
first—It goes on to add that this view has been held by ‘some people’
and in reality seniority must be determined by the priority of actual
*birth* coming out of the womb.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (pp. 461 & 702);—and in
*Saṃskāraratnamālā* (p. 828), which has the following
notes—‘*Subrahmaṇyā*’ is the name of a *mantra* used, at the Jyotiṣṭoma
sacrifice, for inviting Indra; it is recited along with the name of the
sacrificer’s son, and the rule is that it is the name of the eldest son
that is pronounced; and it is the *eldest by age* that is taken; so in
partition also; and between twins also, though they are conceived
simultaneously, yet one that is born first is regarded as the *elder* of
the two.


