+++
title = "131 मातुस् तु"

+++
“According to Medhātithi, Kullūka and Nārāyaṇa, all *Strīdhana* is
meant;—according to ‘others’ mentioned by Medhātithi, Nandana and
Rāghavānanda, the so-called ‘*saudāyika*’ or property derived from the
father’s family.”—Buhler.

‘*Kumārī*’—‘an unmarried daughter (Medhātithi and Kullūka);—‘a daughter
who has no sons’ (Nārāyaṇa).

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 517)
which adds the following notes:—‘*Yautakam*’ here stands for what has
been given to the girl at the time of her marriage, by her father and
other relatives. Halāyudha however holds that it stands for what has
been given to the woman for such household purposes as the purchase of
vegetables and other things, out of which, by her clever management, she
may have saved and increased by judicious handling. To such property of
the mother either the sons or the married daughters can have no right,
as a rule; but if among the married daughters there be such as are
childless or otherwise ill-conditioned, these are to have an equal share
in the property.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 372), which explains
‘*yautakam*’ as ‘property obtained from the father’s family’;—in
*Aparārka* (p. 721), to the effect that when the mother’s property comes
to be divided among her daughters, the unmarried ones have the
preference over the married ones;—in *Smṛtitattva* II (p. 186), which
has the following note:—The term ‘*yautaka*’ is derived from the root
‘yu’ (to join), and hence signifying *junction*, or *union*, it stands
for ‘what is given at marriage’;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (pp. 631 and
750);—in *Dāyakramasaṅgraha* (p. 21);—and by *Jīmūtavāhana*
(*Dāyabhāga*, p. 132), which says ‘*yautakam*’ stands for the dowry
obtained at marriage,—this being indicated by the root ‘*yu*’ (to join)
from which the word is derived,—marriage being the ‘*joining*’ of the
husband and wife.


