+++
title = "141 उपपन्नो गुणैः"

+++
“Medhātīthi, Kullūka and Rāghavānanda refer this rule to the case where
a man has a legitimate son and an adopted son, and think that in such a
case the latter, being eminently virtuous, shall receive, like the
*Kṣetraja*, a fifth or sixth part of the Estate. Medhātithi remarks that
some think he is to have half, but that this opinion is improper, and
finally that *Upadhyāya*, *i.e*., his teacher, allots to the adopted son
less than to the *Kṣetraja*.—Kullūka and Rāghavānanda state that
Govindarāja took the verse to mean that the eminently virtuous adopted,
son shall inherit on failure of a legitimate son and of the son of the
wife, but that this explanation is inadmissible on account of verse
165.—Nārāyaṇa says ‘it has been declared that the adopted son receives a
share like the chief son, when he is eminently virtuous’.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 567), which adds the
following note:—‘*Guṇaīḥ*’, such as caste, learning and character;—the
fact of this adopted son being entitled to inherit being patent from the
fact of his being a ‘son’, the specific mention of ‘being endowed with
virtues’ is meant to indicate that in a case where a body-born son
happens to he born after the adoption, the adopted son is to have a
share in the inheritance only if he is ‘endowed with virtues’, while if
he is not so endowed, he is entitled to maintenance only.

It is quoted in *Dattakamīmāṃsā* (p. 28) as countenancing the adopted
son’s inheritance of the entire property of the adoptive father, when
the latter leaves no ‘body-born’ son;—in *Puruṣārthacintāmaṇi* (p. 370),
to the effect that the adopted son is entitled to an equal share with
the ‘body-born’ son;—and in *Saṃskāra-ratnamālā* (p. 769) to the same
effect as *Dattakamīmāṃsā*.


