+++
title = "142 गोत्र-रिक्थे जनयितुर्"

+++
“The general meaning is that all connections with the first family
ceases. Nevertheless, according to Kātyāyana and the later usage, if
there is a special agreement to that effect, the son may belong to both
fathers (*dvyāmuṣyāyaṇa*)”.—Hopkins.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.132), which notes that ‘adopted
son’ is here mentioned as representing all kinds of secondary ‘sons all
of whom are entitled to inherit the ‘father’s’ property, as is clear
from verse 185 below.—The *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the following
notes:—‘*Datrimaḥ*’ is the same as ‘*dattaka*’, the adopted
son;—‘*janayituḥ*’, of the progenitor;—according to Medhātithi
‘*janayituḥ*’ is to be taken as with the Ablative ending; thus then the
adopted son is not affected by the impurity consequent on the death of
his progenitor. This verse permits the adopting of sons even of *gotras*
other than the adopter’s own.—‘*Pīṇḍa*’ means the offering of *śrāddha*,
and this offering of *śrāddha* follows the *gotra* and the inheritance,
*i.e*. śrāddha is to be offered to that ‘father’ whose ‘gotra’ and
‘inheritance’ one receives;—it is for this reason that the ‘*svadhā*’
*i.e*., *śrāddha*, offered by the adopted son, ceases—‘*vyapaiti*’—from
the person who gave the son to be adopted by another; *i.e*. the adopted
son shall not offer *śrāddha* to that person.—In reality however the
term ‘*piṇḍa*’ here stands for ‘*sāpiṇḍya* if it is taken in the sense
of ‘*śrāddha*’. then the subsequent sentence ‘*vyapaiti svadhā*’ becomes
a superfluous repetition. It is for this reason that all cultured people
treat, in all matters, the adopted son as belonging to the *gotra* of
the adoptive father, and on the death of the adopted son, it is the
*sapiṇḍas* of the adoptive father that observe impurity for ten days;
and in all matters he is regarded as a ‘*sapiṇḍa*’ of the family of the
adoptive father. It is for the same reason that the adopted son is
regarded as having ceased to be the *sapiṇḍa* of his progenitor’s
family.—All this however holds good in a case where the progenitor has
got other sons; in cases where he has none such, his property must go to
his begotten son, even though adopted by another person; and he must
perform his *śrāddha* also. It is in this sense that the
‘*dvyāmuṣyāyana*’ has been held to benefit both the families,

The verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 351), which adds
the following notes:—The ‘adopted’ son is mentioned only by way of
illustration, it stands for all the secondary sons.—Though there are
texts that lay down that the secondary sons are entitled to inherit the
property of the ‘father’, yet these must refer to other *Yugas*, except
so far as the ‘adopted’ son is concerned, who inherits in *Kali-yuga*
also.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 208), as indicating the
legality of adopting sons of other *gotras* also. It proceeds to set
forth the order of preference among the several alternatives regarding
the *gotra* &c. of the son to be adopted:—(1) One who is both *sagotra*
and *sapiṇḍa* of the adopter,—(2) who is *sapiṇḍa* but not
*sagotra*,—(3) who is *sagotra* but not *sapiṇḍa*,—(4) who has the same
*pravaras*,—(5) who is neither *sagotra* nor *sapiṇḍa* nor
*sapravara*.—It is quoted again on p. 686, as likely to be understood as
prohibiting the performance of *śrāddha* for the progenitor, and hence
implying that the son adopted by another person ceases to be the
‘*sapiṇḍa*’ of his progenitor.—It is quoted again on p. 716, where the
following notes are added:—The adopted son is not to take the ‘*gotra*’
or the ‘estate’ of his progenitor, and the ‘*sapiṇḍa* character’ as also
the ‘performance of śrādhā’ of the person who *gives away* the son to be
adopted,—becomes removed from the adopted son; and the reason for this
is that the Pīṇḍa follows the ‘gotra and the estate’ and hence ceases
when these two cease.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* II (p. 38), where the clause
‘*gotrarikthānugaḥ piṇḍah*’ only is quoted in support of the principle
that inheritance is based upon the benefit conferred by the inheritor
upon the original owner of the property.—It is quoted again on p. 384 as
indicating the superiority of the Daughter to the adopted and other
secondary sons;—and again on p. 391, as laying down that the liability
to offering Piṇḍas is based upon the inheritance of property.

It is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 278), which notes that what is here
stated refers to cases where the progenitor has other sons.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 568), which adds that in view of
the general principle that the ‘offering of Piṇḍas’ follows ‘gotra and
inheritance’, the former ceases in the case stated;—‘*svadhā*’ stands
for *śrāddha* and other offerings.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 51), which adds the following
notes:—The meaning is that the ‘*Piṇḍa*’ is concomitant with ‘gotra and
inheritance’;—this refers to the ‘purely adopted son’, the
*Dvyāmuṣyāyaṇa* retaining the *gotra*, etc., of his progenitor
also;—‘*Piṇḍa*’ stands for the *śrāddha* and other after-death rites,
according to Medhātithi, Kullūka Bhaṭṭa and others; while, according to
others, ‘*piṇḍa*’ stands for the ‘*sapiṇḍa*-character’ and ‘*svadhā*’
for the *śrāddha* and other after-death rites; as a matter of fact,
however, what the terms “*gotra-rikṭha-piṇḍa-svadhā*” stand for is all
that, is due to the relationship of the progenitor; and all this is
precluded in the case in question; thus it follows that the adopted son
ceases to have the relation of ‘uterine brotherhood’ with the other sons
of his progenitor, and so forth.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 135) as indicating the change of
*gotra* for the adopted son;—in *Gotrapravaranihandhakadamba* (p. 185),
which says that this applies only to the offering of *Śrāddha* and such
things;—in *Smṛticandrikā* (Saṃskāra, p. 185) as laying down the
cessation of the generator’s *gotra*;—in *Saṃskāramayūkha* (p. 79) as
lending support to the view that the son adopted in another family loses
the *Sāpiṇḍya* also of his progenitor’s family; in *Saṃskāraratnamālā*
(p. 455), which says that this is meant for cases where the progenitor
has got another son;—in *Dattakamīmānsā* (p. 30), which explains the
second line to mean that ‘in giving his son for being adopted by another
person, he relinquishes the śrāddha that that son would have
offered’;—in *Dattakacandrikā* (p. 53), which explains the verse to mean
that—‘By the mere act of being given to be adopted the son ceases to be
a *son* to his progenitor, and thereby relinquishes all his *gotra* and
all claims to his property’;—and in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (śrāddha 4a).


