+++
title = "153 चतुरो ऽंशान्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 528), which adds that no
significance attaching to the singular number in ‘*vipraḥ*’ this same
rule applies to cases where there are several sons from the Brāhmaṇī
wife.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 343), which adds that
this pertains to lands other than that which may have been received by
the father as a religious gift, to which latter, the non-Brahmaṇa sons
are not entitled;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 144);—in
*Dāyakramasaṅgraha* (p. 51);—and by Jīmūtavāhana (*Dāyabhāga*, p. 212).

On the failure of other sons, the rest of the property goes to the
*Sapiṇḍas* (according to Medhātithi),—to the widow and the rest
(according to Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 535), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Saputraḥ*’, one having sons of the twice-born
castes,—‘*aputraḥ*’, one having no sons of the twice-born
castes;—Halāyudha and Pārijāta have taken this verse to men that no part
of the property goes to such son of the married Śūdra wife as is
entirely devoid of good qualities.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 344), which adds that
this refers to such Śūdra-born sons as are not obedient to the father.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 735), which adds the ‘*adhikam*’ means
‘more than the tenth share;’—also on p. 740 where it is added that the
implication o'f this rule is that in the case of the man ‘without sons,’
the property besides the ‘tenth share,’ which goes to the Śūdra-born
son, goes to the ‘widow and the rest’

It is quoted in *Mitākṣara* (2.132-133), which explains the meaning to
be that even though the son of the Śūdra wife is a ‘body-born’ son, yet
he cannot inherit anything more than the tenth share, even when there
are no other sons. It adds the following explanation:—‘*Satputraḥ*’
means ‘one having sons of wives of the twice-born castes,’—‘*aputraḥ*,’
‘one who has no sons from the twice-born wives,’—when such a person
dies, then his sons—*Kṣetraja* and the rest—or *sapiṇḍas*, shall not
give to his son from the Śūdra wife, any more than the tenth share.—This
implies that the sons of *Kṣatriya* and *Vaiśya* wives inherit the
entire property, if there is no son from the Brāhmaṇa wife.

It is quoted in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra 35b);—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 688);—in *Vīramitrodaya*

(Vyavahāra 192b) which explains ‘*satputra*’ as having ‘son born of the
wife of one’s own caste;’ and ‘*aputra*’ as ‘having no son born of the
wife of one’s own caste, and adds that on the death of such a person,
the Kṣetraja and other sons will inherit his property, but the son born
of Śūdra mother will not get more than the tenth part of the estate:—and
by Jīmūtavāhara (*Dāyabhāga*, p. 219), which says that even in the
absence of a son of a twice-born caste, the Śūdra son shall not get more
than the tenth part.


