+++
title = "155 ब्राह्मण-क्षत्रिय-विशां शूद्रापुत्रो"

+++
“The son of a Śūdra wife receives no share of his father’s estate in
case the mother was not legally married’ (Medhātithi; ‘others,’ in
Kullūka),—or in case he is destitute of good qualities (Kullūka and
Rāghavānanda). According to Medhātithi and Nārāyaṇa ‘*na rikthabhāk*’
means ‘receives no larger share than one-tenth, except if the father has
given more to him.”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 535), which adds the
following notes:—‘According to *Lakṣmīdhara* the meaning is that ‘if the
father gives anything to the son of his Śūdra wife, he should give only
the tenth part of his property’;—Halāyudha and Pārijāta hold that the
verse denies all share to the son of the Śūdra mother who is not a
married wife.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 343); which adds that
this refers only to such property as may be given by way of an
affectionate present; and hence there is no incompatibility with those
texts that deny to the said son any part of the landed property.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 735), which notes that this debarring
from inheritance is meant for those cases where the son in question has
already received some affectionate presents from the father;—or that the
verse may be taken to mean that the son is not entitled to anything more
than the tenth share of the property.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 45) as debarring from all
inheritance the son of a *śūdra* mother, who is not a legally married
wife;—and by Jīmūtavāhana (*Dāyabhāga*, p. 219), which says that this
denial of heritance refers only to those cases where the śūdra son has
already got the tenth part of the father’s property, during the latter’s
life-time, through his favour.


