+++
title = "160 कानीनश् च"

+++
**(verse 9.159)**

This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava*, (Prāyaścitta, p. 37);—in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 349), where it is added that though the
sons have been divided into these two sets, yet the duty that devolves
upon them, as ‘*sapiṇḍas*’ or ‘*sagotras*,’ devolves equally on all the
twelve,—such as the offering of water and so forth;—and as for
inheriting the father’s property, the latter set also are entitled to
it, in the absence of the former set

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara*, (p. 549);—and in *Mitākṣarā*,
(2.132), which has the following notes:—The implication of this is that,
in the case of the death also of the *Sapiṇḍa* or the *Samānadaka* of
the father, the property goes to the first set of six sons and not to
the second; though the duty of offering water and so forth devolves
equally upon both sets. The *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds that from the last remark
it follows that the compound ‘*adāyādabāndhavāḥ*’ is to be expounded as
‘*adāyāda*’ (non-inheritors) + *bāndhava* (relations),’ *i*.*e*., though
they don’t inherit the property, they make the offerings required of the
*Sapiṇḍa* or *Sagotra*.

This is quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi*, (Calcutta, p. 147);—and in the
*Dattakacandrikā*, (p. 61).

**(verse 9.160)**

This verse is quoted along with the last, in *Parāśaramādhava*
(Prāyaśacitta, p. 37);—in *Parāśaramādhava*, (Vyavahāra, p. 349);—in
*Vivādaratnākara*, p. 549);—and in *Mitākṣarā*, (2.132).

The latter half of this is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya*, (Saṃskāra, p. 211)
which has the following notes:—This justifies the view that the ‘Śaudra’
also is a ‘secondary son’; but it adds that this can be understood only
in the sense that the son begotten by a Śūdra on a slave girl (not
married) is to be regarded as a ‘secondary son’ only in the absence of a
‘primary son.’

The verse is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī*, (p. 666 and 687);—in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 147);—and in *Dattākacandrikā*, (p. 61).


