+++
title = "168 माता पिता"

+++
‘*Sadṛśam*’.—‘Equal by virtue, not by caste’ (Medhātithi);—‘Equal by
caste’ (Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa, Rāghavānanda and Nandana).

‘*Mātā pitā ca*’.—‘Mother and father, mutually agreeing’
(Kullūka),—‘mother, if there is no father’ (Rāghavā-nanda).

‘*Prītisamyuktam*’—‘Affectionately, not out of greed’ (Medhātithi);—‘not
out of fear and so forth’ (Kullūka and Nandana);—‘not by force or fraud’
(Rāghavānanda).

‘*Āpadi*’.—‘If the adopter has no son’ (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—‘if
the adoptee’s parents are in distress’ (Nārāyaṇa).

This verse is quoted in *Madnapārijāta* (p. 652), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Sadṛśam* of the same caste; if the father is dead or
gone to foreign lands, and the mother finds herself in distress, she is
by herself, entitled to ‘give away’ the son; similarly if the mother
happens to be insane or dead, the father, by himself, is entitled to
give him away; in other cases the child can be given away only by the
consent of both parents;—the addition of the term ‘*āpadi*’ means that
no son can be given away in normal times; if he be given in normal
times, the sin of it falls upon the giver, not the receiver, of the son.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.132), which adds that no son should be
given under normal conditions,—this being a prohibition meant for the
*giver, not for the adopter* (adds the *Bālambhaṭṭī*), who therefore
incurs no sin;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra 188b).

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 224), which adds the
following notes—‘*Āpadi*’, during a famine and so forth;—if the child is
given in normal times, the sin lies on the giver;—or it may refer to the
adopter, in which case ‘*āpadi*’ will mean ‘when he has no son’,—also on
p. 211, where ‘*sadṛśam*’ is explained as ‘of the same caste’;—it
rejects the view of Medhātithi that the Ksattriya can be adopted by the
Brāhmaṇa, and also that of the *Kafpataru* that the Brāhmaṇa can adopt a
Śūdra, on account of their being opposed to Śaunaka, Gautama and
Yājñavalkya.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 736), which adds the. following
notes:—‘*Adbhiḥ*’ stands for all those details that accompany
gifts;—‘*āpadi*’, during a famine and so forth;—or ‘*āpadi*’ may refer
to the *adopter*, in which case it will mean ‘in the event of his having
no son’;—‘*sadṛśam*’, of the same caste as the giver and the
adopter;—‘*prītisamyuktan*’, not moved by fear, or any such motive.

It is quoted in *Nirṇayasindhu* (p. 176);—in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 567),
which adds the following notes—‘*Āpadi*’, when the adopter has no
son;—‘*sadṛśam*’, of the same caste; but Medhātithi holds that the
‘equality’ is in *qualities*, not in caste;—‘*prītisamyuktam*’, free
from all fear and such other motives;—and in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 47),
which reads ‘*vā*’ (for ‘*ca*’) and remarks that in the absence of the
mother, the father alone may give away the son, or the mother may do it
in the absence of the father; it goes on to controvert Vijñāneśvara’s
view that the sin of giving away the son in *normal* times accrues to
the *giver*, not to the *adopter*;—‘*Sadṛśam*’, equal in family-status
and other qualifications, says Medhātithi; hence according to him the
*Kṣatriya* also may be adopted by the Brāhmaṇa. But it prefers the view
of Kullūka by which ‘*sadṛśam*’ means ‘of equal caste’.

This is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Prāyaścitta, p. 38);—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (pp. 557 and 692);—in *Dattakacandrīkā* (p. 48),
which explains ‘*āpadi*’ as ‘when the adopter has no son’,—and
‘*Sadṛśam*’ as ‘belonging to the same caste,’—it notes Medhātithi’s
opinion that ‘*Sadṛśam*’ means ‘possessed of equalities in keeping with
the traditions of the family,’ and hence even a Kṣatriya could be
adopted by the Brāhmaṇa, and adds that what this means is that ‘when the
Brāhmaṇa, has a *body-born* son, his other sons of the Kṣatriya and
other castes, even though not entitled to the offering of Balls and
water, yet for purposes of perpetuating his name, they serve the
purposes of a *son*’;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra 38a—and Śrāddha
4a);—in *Kṛtyasārasamuccaya* (p. 73), which explains ‘*adbhiḥ*’ as
‘water’ and notes that it includes *Tila* and the other ingredients
also,—it explains ‘*sadṛśam*’ as ‘of the same caste’, and ‘*āpadi*’ as
‘in the event of the adopter having no son’,—it adds that
‘*Prītisamyuktam*’ (which is its reading for ‘*prītisamyuktam*’) means
that the father or mother should make over the child through love and
not through fear or covetousness;—and in *Dattakamīmānsā*’ (p. 9 and
20), which explains ‘*āpadi*’ as ‘during a famine or some such times of
distress’,—and adds that if the parents give away the child during
normal times, they incur sin.


