+++
title = "176 सा चेद्"

+++
“Rāghavānada, relying on Yājñavalkya 2.130, thinks that the word ‘*vā*’
at the end of the first half-verse, permits the insertion of ‘or not a
virgin.’”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 96), which adds the following
explanation:—If, on the death of her flawless husband,—or even during
the life-time of a husband who is either impotent or insane or
out-cast,—a woman has recourse to a second man, that man is called her
‘*paunarbhava*’ husband, and the woman who is formally married to such a
husband is called ‘*punarbhūḥ*’; or the meaning may be that if a woman
abandons the husband of her youth,—who has no defects and is fully
capable of maintaining her,—and has sexual intercourse with another man,
but returns again to her former husband, she is ‘*gatapratyāgatā*’ and
also ‘*kṣatayoni*’; and the husband (deserted and resumed) is
‘*paunarbhava*’.—Both these kinds of the ‘*paunarbhava*’ are described
by Vaśiṣṭha.

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 740) to the effect that
re-marriage is permitted only so long as the girl is still
‘*akṣatayoni*’, ‘virgin’. It adds the following notes:—If the virgin
here described marries again, it is the second husband that is called
‘*paunarbhava*’; and it is this man, and his sons, that are excluded
from *śrāddhas* and *gifts* etc.; the name cannot apply to the former
(deserted) husband or his sons. Though the woman being ‘*punarbhūḥ*’,
both the husbands, being related to her, are liable to the title
‘*paunarbhava*’ (‘related to the Punarbhū’), yet the most reasonable
view appears to be to apply the title to that particular husband by
virtue of whose connection the woman herself becomes ‘*punarbhū’.
Aparārka* has applied the title to both the husbands; but this view
becomes annulled by the above considerations. Though in the explanation
provided by us, there would appear to be no distinction made as to
whether the *gatapratyāgatā* girl is or is not still a *virgin*, yet
both Nārāyaṇa and Medhātithi have held that the epithet ‘*akṣatayoniḥ*’,
‘*virgin*’, is meant to be construed with the ‘*gatapratyāgatā*’ also.
And this is the correct view.

It is quoted in the *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra 38a.)


