+++
title = "180 क्षेत्रजादीन् सुतान्"

+++
“These substitutes are not to be taken if there is a ‘body-born’ son
(Medhātithi),—or an ‘appointed daughter’ (Kullūka).

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 574), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Putrapratinidhīn*,’ ‘substitutes of the Body-born Son
and the Appointed Daughter’,—they perform the necessary functions only
in the absence of these two;—the reason for this is supplied by the term
‘*Kriyālopāt*’—which means ‘on account of the risk of transgressing the
injunction that one should beget children’;—the injunction is an
obligatory one; and as such has to be obeyed by some means or the other;
hence when the primary method of having children fails, one must have
recourse to the secondary method of having substitutes.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva*, II, (p. 262), to the effect that the name
‘son’ is applied to the substitutes only figuratively;—in *Aparārka* (p.
97);—in *Mitākṣarā*, (3.259), to the effect that the substitutes are not
really sons, they are so called because they perform the functions of
the son;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 207), which notes that those
‘sons’ whose bodies are made up of the constituents of the body of one
of the two parents,—*e.g*. the ‘Kṣetraja,’ ‘Gūḍhaja,’ ‘Kānīvn’
‘Paunarbhava’ and ‘Sahoḍha’—are called ‘substitutes because the
constituents of the body of the other parent are wanting’;—and in the
case of the Appointed Daughter, even though her body is made up of the
constituents of the bodies of both parents, and as such she would appear
to be exactly like a regular ‘son,’ yet she has been regarded as a
‘substitute’ or ‘secondary son,’ on the ground that being a girl, she
has a body wherein the constituents of the *father’s* body are less than
those of the *mother’s*; it is for this reason that Yājñavalkya has
called her ‘equal’ to the ‘Body-born’ Son;—the son of the Appointed
Daughter is ‘secondary,’ the constituents of the bodies of his
grandparents existing in his body indirectly (through his mother). In
the case of the ‘Dattaka,’ ‘Krīta,’ ‘Kṛtrima,’ ‘Svayamdatta’ and
‘Apabiddha,’ on the other hand,—where the ‘son’ is not born of either of
the adoptive parents,—there is no connection at all with the
constituents of the bodies of these latter; and in their case, their
character of ‘secondary son’ would rest entirely upon the verbal
authority of the texts, and in their case the term ‘*pratinidhi*,’
‘substitute,’ would mean ‘*anukalpa*,’ ‘secondary alternative.’

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 837), which notes that these sons
are not regular ‘sons,’ the name being applied to them only on the
ground of their performing the functions of the son;—in
*Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (pp. 552, 652 and 683);—in *Dattakamīmānsā* (p.
29);—in *Dattakacandrikā* (p. 48);—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra
189b), which says that the reason for their being called ‘secondary
substitutes’ lies in the fact that there have been no marriage and other
rites performed.


