+++
title = "182 भ्रातॄणाम् एकजातानाम्"

+++
Medhātithi on verses 182-202 is wanting in all Mss. But Kullūka
criticises his view on 187; and Vivādaratnākara (p. 522) quotes him on
194.

“Hence no subsidiary sons (Kullūka and Rāghavānanda), or no *Kṣetrjas*
(Nārāyaṇa) are necessary in such a case. Kullūka and Rāghavānanda add
that the brother will take the estate and give the funeral offerings on
failure of a wife, daughters and so forth (Yājñavalkya, 2.135).”—Buhler.

This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnkara* (p. 582);—in *Smṛtitattva*, (p.
389), which explains ‘*ekajātānām*’ as ‘born of the same father and
mother’;—in *Mitākṣarā*, (2.132), to the effect that the verse is meant
to prohibit the adopting of any other person as ‘son,’ so long as the
brother’s son can be adopted; it does not mean that the nephew is a
regular ‘son.’

It is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Saṃskāra, p. 211), which adds the
following notes:—The term ‘*putriṇaḥ*’ indicates some action taken by
the man who adopts the ‘son’; so that the meaning of the sentence comes
to be this:—Among uterine brothers, if a son is born to even one, the
others, having no sons of their own, should adopt that son as theirs;
nor would this be repugnant to the prohibition that there can be no
adopting of one who is the only son of his parents; as the only ground
for this prohibition lies in the consideration that if the only son
becomes adopted by another person, the line of his own father becomes
extinct; which consideration is not present in the case in question as
the ‘line’ of all uterine brothers is one and the same; then there is
another reason also; what the prohibition interdicts is the *giving* of
the only son to be adopted, while in the case in question there is no
*giving away*, the son being regarded as belonging to all the brothers,
only by mutual understanding.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭtī* (p. 668);—in *Dattakamīmāṃsā*
(p. 10) as lending support to the view that, so far as possible, one
should adopt his own brother’s son, and adds that ‘*ekajātānām*’ makes
it clear that the adopting is to be done by the uterine brother, not by
a brother born of different fathers or different mothers, and that
‘*bhrātṛṛṇām* (*bhrātṝṇām?*)’ implies that there can be no mutual
adoption by the brother of the son of the sister;—and in *Vīrmitrodaya*
(Vyavahāra 108b).


