+++
title = "185 न भ्रातरो"

+++
“Kullūka and Rāghavānanda insert, after ‘who leave no son,’ ‘nor widow
and daughters’, and before ‘brothers’, ‘who leaves no parents.’
Nārāyaṇa, who (as also Govindarāja and Nandana) reads ‘*eva vā*’, ‘or
brothers’, says that the father inherits the estate of an undivided son
leaving no male issue, or the brothers with his permission, and that the
estate of a divided son descends to his wife and other heirs mentioned
in Yājñavalkya II, 135-136.”—Buhler.

The first half of this verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.132) to the
effect that *all* sons, ‘body-born’ as well as others, are entitled to
inherit the father’s property. The *Bālambhaṭṭī* quotes verse 184 and
notes that ‘son’ cannot be taken as standing for the *body-bom* sons
only; because the rights of the body-born born have been declared in
another verse already.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 653);—and in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 552),
which quotes the first half only;—it quotes the second half on p. 592,
where ‘*aputrasya*’ is explained as ‘without sons, primary as well as
secondary.’

The second half is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.136), as laying down that
the property of a sonless man goes to his Father or Brother;—again as
justifying the conclusion that, if the man leaves a large property, his
wife is to receive enough for her maintenance and the remainder is to go
to his brother;—again, where the view is expressed that all that is
meant is that both the Father and the Brother are entitled to inherit;
and no priority or preference is meant to be implied by the order in
which the two are mentioned;—on this the *Bālambhaṭṭī* notes that this
view is supported by the use of the particle ‘*vā*’;—again, where it is
explained as meaning that brothers inherit only in the absence of the
father.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 650 and 651);—in
*Dattakacandrikā* (p. 61);—and by Jīmūtavāhana *Dāyabhāga*, (p. 253 and
293), to the effect that it is this *brother* that inherits, not the
*brother’s son*.


