+++
title = "192 जनन्यां संस्थितायाम्"

+++
According to Kullūka and Rāghavānanda, this rule applies to *unmarried*
daughters only, the married daughters receiving only a fourth of a
brother’s share (see 118 above).—Nārāyaṇa holds that ‘*mātrikam
riktham*’ refers to property other than the ‘*strīdhana*’, and qualifies
the ‘sisters’ as ‘without son’.

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 667), which adds the
following notes:—The meaning of the verse is that the mother’s estate is
to go (1) to her own daughters, (2) on their absence to her daughter’s
sons, (3) in the absence of these latter to her *own* sons, not to the
sons of her cowives, (4) in the absence of her sons, to the sons of her
own son;—the expression ‘*samam sarve sahodarāḥ*’ is meant to preclude
the brothers born of different mothers;—the sons of co-wives being
entitled to inherit only in default of the woman’s own sons (or
grandsons).

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.145), as asserting the title of both sons
and daughters to the estate of their mother; it explains the
construction as—‘*Mātṛkam riktham sarve sahodarāḥ samam bhajeran
sanābhayo bhaginyaśca samam bhajeran*’;—it does not mean that the ‘*sons
and daughters* together shall divide the property equally’; if this were
the meaning then the words used would have been ‘*bhrātṛbhagiyaḥ*’ or
‘*bhrāṭaraḥ*’;—the term *samam* is meant to preclude the special
additional share’ (of the eldest brother), and ‘*sahodarāḥ*’ to preclude
the brothers born of other mothers:—The *Bālambhaṭṭī* reproduces the
remarks noted above from the *Madanapārijāta*, attributing it to the
*Kalpataru*.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 721), which remarks that the particle
‘*ca*’ (‘*bhaginyaśca*’) denotes *option*, not *combination*; and in the
option, the first title is of the *unmarried* daughters;—in
*Vivādaratnākara* (p. 515), which adds the following notes—‘*Samam*’,
without any additional share being allotted to the
eldest,—‘*bhaginyaḥ*’, those that are unmarried and those that have had
no children,—‘*Sanābhayaḥ*’, uterine;—in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 70),
which states the opinion of ‘some’ that the verse lays down the conjoint
title of brothers and sisters to such property of their mother as she
had received as presents from her husband;—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi*
(Calcutta, pp. 125 and 142), which explains ‘*samam*’ as ‘not in unequal
shares’,—*Sanābhayaḥ*’ as ‘uterine’, and notes that this refers to
*unmarried* sisters only,—in *Nityācārapaddhati* (p. 296);—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra 216a), which says that the sense is that all
*uterine brothers and sisters* are entitled to equal shares in the
mother’s property,—and all half brothers and sisters are excluded;—and
by Jīmūtavāhana (*Dāyabhāga*, p. 126), which has the same note.


