+++
title = "194 अध्यग्न्य्-अध्यावाहनिकन् दत्तम्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 368), which
notes that the term ‘six-fold’ is meant to preclude a *lesser*, not a
*larger*, number;—in *Mitākṣarā* (2.135-136), as setting aside the view
that women have no rights to property except through their husband or
son *Bālambhaṭṭī* explaining ‘*adhyagni*’ as that obtained near the fire
at the marriage ceremony,—‘*adhyāvāhanikam*’ as that obtained at the
time of her coming to her husband’s place;—It is quoted again under
2.143, where it is noted that the *six* kinds mentioned are meant only
as denying a lesser number; it goes on to quote Kātyāyana as explaining
each of these terms:—‘(1)That which is given to the girl at the time of
marriage near the fire is called *adhyagni*,—(2) what she receives at
the time of being carried away from her father’s house is called
*adhyāvāhanika*,—(3) what she receives as a loving present from her
father-in-law or mother-in-law at the time of offering obeisance is
called *prītidatta*,—(4) (5) (6) whatever the married girl receives from
her husband or from her parents or brothers is called *Saudāyika*.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 522), which offers the following
explanations:—‘*Adhyagni*’, what is given by anyone at the time of
marriage,—‘*adhyāvāhanika*’, whatever is carried behind her when she is
being carried away from her father’s house,—Medhātithi however holds
that *adhyāvāhanika* is what she receives from her parents-in-law at the
time of returning to her father’s place; and this view also maybe
accepted;—‘*prititaḥ dattam*’, what she receives from the father-in-law
and other elders as a reward for her character, efficiency and other
good qualities;—the mention of ‘six kinds’ is for the purpose of
precluding a lesser, not a larger, number; in fact a seventh kind,
‘*ādhivedanīka*’—what she receives by way of compensation for being
superseded by another—has also been mentioned by Yājñavalkya.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 68), which also remarks that the
‘six’ are mentioned only for the purpose of denying a lesser number;—and
in *Hemādri* (Dāna, p. 51), which explains ‘*adhyagni*’ as ‘what is
given to the woman before the fire’,—‘*adhyāvāhanikam*’ as ‘given to her
by her father and relatives at the time of her
marriage,’—‘*prītikarmaṇi*’, ‘given by the husband as a token of
conjugal love’—and—‘*prāptam*’ as given to her, even after her marriage,
by her brother and others.’


