+++
title = "197 यत् त्व्"

+++
**(verses 9.196-197)**

‘*Vasu*’—includes, according to Nārāyaṇa, all kinds of property,
‘*strīdhana*’ as well as what is not ‘*strīdhana*’.

These verses are quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 373), which
explains the meaning to be that on the death of a woman married by any
of the forms of marriage here named, without leaving any heir—beginning
from the daughter down to the son’s son,—her property goes to her
*husband*, and not to her mother or other relations,—while the property
of an heirless woman, who has been married by the Āsura, Rākṣasa or
Paiśāca forms, goes to her parents.

They are quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 753), which remarks that the
devolution of the property on the husband should be regarded as an
optional alternative; it apparently takes ‘*āsurādiṣu*’ of verse 191 as
including all those mentioned under 196.

They are quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 519), which explains
‘*aprajasi*’ as ‘childless’; and the verses to mean that (*a*) in the
case of those married by the forms of marriage mentioned in 196, the
property goes to the husband, and (*b*) in that of those married by the
forms mentioned in 197, it goes to her father;—it goes on to remark that
this refers to what the woman had received at the time of marriage.

They are quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 72);—in *Smṛtitattva* II (p.
186), which explains the meaning to be that the ‘*strīdhana*’ obtained
at the time of the marriage under the forms mentioned in 196 goes to the
husband, while that obtained at the time of marriage under the forms
mentioned in 197 goes first to her mother, and in her absence to her
father;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī* (p. 756);—in *Dāyākramasaṅgraha* (p.
23);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Culcutta, p. 143), which explains
‘*aprajāyām*’ as ‘childless’; and by Jīmūtavāhana (*Dāyabhāga*, p. 141).

Verse 197 is quoted in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra 219a), which says that
the ‘mother’ being placed first in the compound implies that the father
is to inherit the property only after the mother.


