+++
title = "198 स्त्रियान् तु"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 667), which makes the
following remarks:—The term ‘*strī*’ here stands for the *step-mother*
and ‘*kanyā*’ for the *stepdaughter*,—‘*Brāhmaṇī*’ stands for *higher
caste* in general, so that the property of a *śūdra* step-mother will go
to the daughter of her *Brāhmaṇī* or *Kṣatriya* or *Vaiśya* co-wife,
that of the Vaiśya step-mother will go to the daughter of *Brāhmaṇī* or
*Kṣatriya* co-wife, and that of the *Kṣatriya* step-mother to the
daughter of the *Brāhmaṇī* co-wife,—inasmuch as the present texṭ makes
the property inheritable by the step-daughter of a higher caste, it
follows that step-daughters of the lower caste are not entitled to
inherit the property of the step-mother of a higher caste, so long as
this latter has a son.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 372), to the effect
that, when a woman dies childless, her property goes to the daughter of
that co-wife of hers who is of a higher caste, and in the absence of
such a daughter to the children of that daughter.

It is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* II (p. 186), which has the following
notes:—In view of the qualification ‘given by the father’, the rule must
be taken as referring to all that she receives from her father at other
times than that of her marriage;—the term ‘*Brāhmaṇī Kanyā*’ stands for
daughter in general;—or the meaning may be that if a Kṣatriya or Vaiśya
woman dies childless, her property goes to her step-daughter born of her
Brāhmaṇī co-wife, and not to her huśand.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.145) to the effect that on the death of a
childless woman her property goes to her stepdaughter born of a co-wife
of the higher caste, and in the absence of such a daughter, to the child
of that daughter. It adds that the term ‘*Brāhmaṇi*’ stands for the
*higher caste*; so that the property of a childless Vaiśya woman goes to
the daughter of her Kṣatriya co-wife. The *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds that the
property goes to the *step-daughter*, not to the *step-son*; and it goes
on to reproduce the exact words of *Madanapārijāta* and of
*Parāśaramādhva*. It remarks that this rule is meant to be an exception
to what has gone before, by which the property of the childless woman
would go to her husband or brother, etc.;—further, that the term
‘*kathañcana*’ is meant to include property even other than that
received from her father.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 71), which adds that ‘*vā*’ here
stands for ‘*ca*’; so that the property is to be divided between the
step-daughter and the step-daughter’s child;—it has been held that the
term ‘*Brāhmaṇī*’ stands for *equal and higheṛ castes*; but we find no
authority for this.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 721), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Pitrā*’, this is mentioned only by way of
illustration;—‘*Kanyā*’, step-daughter;—again on p. 753;—and in
*Dāyakramasaṅgraha* (p. 26).


