+++
title = "201 अनंशौ क्लीब-पतितौ"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva* II (p. 385), as enumerating
persons not entitled to inheritance, and hence to the offering of
funeral oblations;—in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 201, and again on
p. 366), where ‘*nirindriyāḥ*’ is explained as ‘whose organs have become
deficient through some disease’;—in *Mitākṣarā*, (2.140), which has the
following notes;—‘*Nirindriya*’ is one whose organs have disappeared by
reason of some disease;—these persons are debarred from inheritance,
being entitled to mere subsistence and clothing; if they are not
supported, his relations become degraded. The *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds the
following explanations:—‘*Jātyandha-badhirāḥ*’ are those who are blind
and deaf by birth,—‘*mūka*’ is one who is incapable from birth of
uttering words,—thus are these two distinguished from ‘*nirindriya*,’
which means those who have lost some organ as the result of disease.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara*, (p. 487), which adds the following
notes:—The term ‘*jāti*’ is added with a view to denote
incurability,—‘*jaḍa*,’ one who is incapable of distinguishing what is
his own and what belongs to others,—‘*nirindriyāḥ*’ includes the lame
and the like, who are not entitled to the performance of *śrauta* and
*smārta* rites;—and in *Dāyakramasaṅgraha*, (p. 29).

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha*, (p. 73), which explains
‘*nirindriyāḥ*’ as devoid of the olfactory and other organs;—in
*Vīramitrodaya* (Rājanīti, p. 40), which explains ‘*nirindriya*’ as one
who has lost his organs through disease;—and in *Madanapārijāta*, (p.
682), which has the same explanation of ‘*nirindriya*’ and adds that all
these men have no share in the property, but they have to he supported.


