+++
title = "202 सर्वेषाम् अपि"

+++
‘*Atyantam*’—‘For life’ (Medhātithi and Kullūka);—‘at all’ (taken with
‘*adadat*’, ‘not giving’) \[Nārāyaṇa\].

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā*, (2.140) to the effect that if the
persons mentioned in the preceding verse are not properly maintained the
persons responsible become ‘degraded,’—‘*atyantam*’ means ‘for life’; it
goes on to add that these persons are debarred from inheritance only if
they are found to have the said disqualifications *before* the division
of the patrimony,—not after the partition has taken place; and that if
the said disqualifications are subsequently removed by medication, they
get their share in the property. It concludes by saying that the said
disqualifications are applicable in the case of women also.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara*, (p. 487), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Sarveṣām*,’ of the eunuch and the rest,—‘*atyantam*,’ for
life;—in *Vyavahāramayūkha*, (p. 73), to the effect that those who are
not entitled to inheritance are yet entitled to maintenance *throughout
life*;—in *Parāśaramādhava*, (Vyavahāra, p. 366), which explains
‘*atyantam*’ as ‘for life’—in *Madanapārijāta*, (p. 682), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Sarveṣām*,’ those not entitled to
inheritance,—‘*atyantam*,’ for life;—the said disqualifications are
effective bars only if found before partition, not if they are found
after partition, or if they are cured by medication, or if the necessary
expiatory rites are duly performed;—in *Vyavahāra-Bālambhaṭṭī*, (p. 349
and 575);—and in *Vīramitrodaya*, (Vyavahāra, 221b).


