+++
title = "209 पैतृकन् तु"

+++
This verse has been taken by Nārāyaṇa to imply that ancestral property
may be divided by the sons even during the life-time of the father, even
though the latter may be unwilling.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.121), which explains the meaning
as follows:—“If a property was acquired by the grandfather, but taken
away by some one else and not redeemed during his life-time, when such
property has been redeemed by the father (the grandfather’s son), this
is as good as ‘self-acquired’ by the father, and hence the father may
not divide this with his sons, unless he is himself willing to do so”;
and it takes this to imply that in the case of other kinds of ancestral
property the sons may force partition on the father.—The *Bālambhaṭṭī*
adds that ‘*svārjitam*’ being explained as ‘as good as self-acquired’,
the explanation of it given by ‘Medhātithi—as ‘acquired by his own
learning &c.’—becomes unacceptable.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 461), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Paitṛkam*’, ancestral—‘*anavāpyam*’ (which is its reading for
‘*anavāptam*’), which is hard to be recovered by the father; such
property being ‘self-acquired’ by the father, he shall not divide it
with his sons, except when he is quite willing.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 339), which has the
same explanation as *Mitākṣarā*;—in *Dāyatattva* (p. 9);—in
*Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra 35a);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p.
126), to the effect that in regard to the property acquired by the
father, independently of his ancestral property, sons have no voice, he
himself being the sole disposer of it;—in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra
177b), which explains ‘*svayamārjitam*’, (1) as ‘*svayamarjitamiva*’,
‘it is *as if it were* his self-acquired property’; and (2) as giving
the reason for the law laid down, ‘*since*,’ ‘it is his self-acquired
property’;—and says that ‘*akāmaḥ*’ implies that *if the father so
wishes*, he may divide the property among his sons;—and by Jīmūtavāhana
(*Dāyabhāga*, p. 201).


