+++
title = "211 येषाञ् ज्येष्ठः"

+++
‘*Hīyetāṃśapradānataḥ*,’—‘On account of having become an outcast and so
forth’ (Medhātithi),—‘by becoming an ascetic’ (Kullūka and Nandana),—‘by
having emigrated’ (Nandana),—‘by becoming an eunuch after the first
partition’ (Nārāyaṇa).

‘*Bhāgo na lupyate*.’—‘His share must not be divided by his co-parceners
among themselves’ (Nārāyaṇa); ‘the disposal of his share is prescribed
in the next verse’ (Medhātithi, Rāghavānanda).

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2. 139), which explains the meaning
as follows:—‘among united brothers, if, at the time of partition,
one—either the eldest or the middle or the youngest—should happen to be
disqualified from receiving his share—either by entering another stage
of life or by committing such heinous sins as the killing of a Brāhmaṇa,
or if he happen to die,—then his share is not lost, *i*. *e*., it has to
be set aside, and not divided among his co-parceners’.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 678), which adds the same
explanation as *Mitākṣarā*; but as grounds of disqualification, it
mentions ‘entering of another life-stage or becoming an outcast’; it
adds that the next verse lays down what is to be done with the share
thus set aside.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 749), which explains ‘*amṣhapradāna*’ as
*partition*; and points out that ‘*hīyate*’ means disqualification by
reason of ‘renunciation’, ‘becoming an outcast’ and so forth; his share
however is not lost, does not disappear,—it has to be determined and
disposed of as laid down in the next verse.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 601), which explains as
follows:—‘Hence among united brothers, if anyone should take to
renunciation, or by some such cause become deprived of his share, or
should happen to die, his share does not disappear’;—and in *Dāyatattva*
(p. 55).

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 67), which explains ‘*hīyate*’ as
‘by reason of entering another state or becoming an outcast—and in
*Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 362), which adds the following
explanation:—‘Among united brothers, who are sons of different mothers,
if any one,—either the eldest or the middle or the youngest—should be
deprived of his share at the time of partition—by reason of his having
gone to a foreign country and such other causes—his share does not
disappear; it has to be set aside, and not divided among the
co-parceners.’


