+++
title = "212 सोदर्या विभजेरंस्"

+++
The share of a deceased or disqualified united brother goes first to the
reunited brothers of the full blood and to such sisters of the full
blood as are not married, next to such brothers of the full blood as had
not been reunited, and finally to the reunited half-brothers (Medhātithi
and Kullūka and Rāghavānanda);—first to the reunited full brothers,
secondly to the reunited half brothers, then to the full sisters
(Nārāyaṇa and Nandana).

The said persons inherit the property only on the failure of sons,
wives, daughters and parents (Kullūka, Rāghavānanda and Nārāyaṇa).

According to Nārāyaṇa what is here said refers to the property of one
who dies before partition; but according to others to that of a reunited
brother only.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.139), which adds the following
explanation:—‘This verse lays down the manner of disposing of the share
set aside in accordance with the preceding verse; which is as
follows:—The uterine brothers shall divide it; *i.e*., it shall be
divided equally among all his uterine brothers, those that were united
with him as well as those not so united and those who may have gone to
foreign lands; they should all come together and divide the said
property equally among themselves;—also those step-brothers who had been
united with him, and his uterine sisters; all these should divide it
equally among themselves.—The *Bālambhaṭṭī* has the following
notes:—That the *un-united* full brothers are meant by the first half is
shown by the mention of the ‘united’ in the second half;—that the second
half refers to *half* brothers is shown by the mention of ‘*uterine*’
brothers in the first half;—the half-brothers meant here must be
understood to be of the same caste as the original owner.

It is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 679), which has the following
notes:—The mention of ‘uterine’ in the first half and of ‘brothers,’ in
the second half indicate that the latter stands for *half-brothers*;—the
mention of ‘united’ in the second half, and the omission of it in
connection with the ‘uterine brothers’ indicate that the uterine
brothers meant are those that were *un-united*. Thus then the meaning of
this verse comes to be this:—The property that has been set aside as the
share of the disqualified person, shall be divided equally by his
un-united uterine brothers, who should all—even those who may have gone
to other lands—come together for the division; as also the step-brothers
of the same caste as the original owner, who were united with him, and
also his uterine sisters. All these, beginning from the un-united
uterine brothers and ending with the uterine sisters, should divide the
property equally among themselves. That the half-brothers meant here are
those of the same caste as the owner is shown by the fact that for the
brothers of *different* castes, different shares have been laid down.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 749), which adds the following
explanation—The said share should be taken by those uterine brothers who
were united with the original owner, and not those who were not united,
even though they be his uterine brothers; if there be no *united*
uterine brothers, then it shall be divided among all his uterine
brothers equally—without any inequality due to seniority and so
forth;—if there be no uterine brothers, then it shall go to the uterine
sisters;—and if there be no uterine sisters, then it shall go to the
step-sisters and step-brothers.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 601), which adds the following
notes—‘*Sodary* *āḥ*’ qualifies ‘*bhrātaraḥ*’ (of the second line); so
that the meaning is that among his ‘brothers’ only those will divide the
said property who fulfill the conditions of being both ‘uterine’ and
‘united and also the uterine sisters who are *unmarried*.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 362), which explains
the meaning to be that the said property shall be taken by the
*un-united* uterine brothers, and the *united* half-brothers, and the
uterine sisters,—all coming together, even those who may have gone to
other lands; it being divided among these equally;—and in
*Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 158), as countenancing the view that
brothers, even though uterine, have no share, if they did not live
jointly.


