+++
title = "216 ऊर्ध्वं विभागाज्"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 538), which adds the
following explanation.—If a son is born to the father after partition of
the property between himself and his sons, then on the death of the
father that son shall inherit the entire share of the father; but during
his father’s lifetime he shall be entitled to only a part of the
father’s property;—it adds that the particle ‘*eva*’ has been added with
a view to emphasise that the new-born son would not be entitled to any
part of the share of the divided brothers.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 340), which explains
‘*pītryam*’ as ‘belonging to the parents—in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 655),
which also adds the same explanation of ‘*pitryam*’;—in *Aparārka* (p.
729), which adds the explanation that ‘if a son is born after partition
has been made he shall take only his father’s, not the brothers’
property, and if there be no brothers, he shall share the father’s
property with those who may have lived jointly with his father’;—in
*Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 46);—in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 159),
which remarks that the first half of the verse having definitely made
the new-born son the sole heir to the father’s property, his joint
brothers, mentioned in the second half, could be entitled to it only on
the death of that new-born son;—in *Nṛsiṃhaprasāda* (Vyavahāra 35a):—in
*Smṛtisāroddharā* (p. 332);—and by Jīmātavāhana (*Dāyabhāga*, p. 203),
which explains the meaning to be as follows—‘If the father, after having
divided his property among his sons and taken his own share, obtains
another son, then the share taken by the father devolves upon this son,
and if the father had been living with some other sons, then the
new-born son shall receive his share out of the share of all those with
whom the father may have been living.’


