+++
title = "217 अनपत्यस्य पुत्रस्य"

+++
“Kullūka, Nārāyaṇa and Nandana all three hold that the mother inherits
only on failure of sons (grandsons and great-grandsons, adds Nandana),
widows and daughters; but they disagree with respect to the sequence of
the next following heirs: Kullūka holds that the mother and the father,
whose right has been mentioned above, verse 85, follow next, inheriting
conjointly, then brothers, afterwards brothers’ sons, and after them the
paternal grandmother;—Nārāyaṇa gives the following order: 1. Mother, 2.
Father, 3. Brothers, 4. Brothers’ sons, 5. Maternal
grandmother.”—Buhler.

Hopkins is wrong in saying that verse 185 is not in Medhātithi’s text.
As a matter of fact, Medhātithi’s gloss on that verse has shared the
same fate as that on all the other important verses bearing upon
inheritance.

This verse is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.135-136) as laying down the
rights of the mother and grandmother to the son’s property. The
*Bālambhaṭṭī* explains ‘*vṛttāyām*’, as ‘dying’.

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 744);—in *Vivadaratnākara* (p. 591) which
adds the following, notes:—‘Childlessness’ meant here is ‘absence of
sons and: wife and others’;—the grandmother inherits only in the absence
of brother or other *Sapiṇḍas*;—the father inherits in the absence of
the mother;—‘*dāyādyam*’ means ‘property inheritable by heirs’.

It is quoted in *Vyavahāramayūkha* (p. 63) to the effect that in the
absence of ‘brothers’ sons the first claim is that of the
grandmother;—and in *Smṛtitattva* II (p. 195) to the effect that in the
absence of ‘brothers’ sons’, the property goes to the grandfather, and
in hie absence, to the grandmother; the rights of the grandfather being
superior to those of the grandmother, just as those of the father are
superior to those of the mother.


