+++
title = "219 वस्त्रम् पत्रम्"

+++
‘*Striyaḥ*’—‘Female slaves’ (Medhātithi);—‘wives’ (Nārāyaṇa).

(*a*) ‘*Yogakṣemam* (*b*) *pracāram*’.—(*a*) ‘agencies securing
protection; such as councillors, parents, old ministers, who protect
people against thieves; (*b*) pasture land’ (Medhātithi, who is badly
misrepresented by Buhler; Kullūka and Raghāvānanda);—(*a*) ‘means of
gain, *e.g*., a royal grant, and means of protection (*b*) and roads’
(Nārāyaṇa);—(*a*) sources of gain, persons for whom one sacrifices, and
means of protection, (*b*) path leading to fields.’ (Nandana).

This verse is quoted in *Madanapārijāta* (p. 685), which adds the
following notes—Only those clothes are impartible which are worn
;—‘*patram*,’ conveyances, *e.g*., horses, palanquins and so forth; of
these also those are not to be divided which have been in the constant
use of any one exclusively;—or ‘*patra*’ may be taken as ‘property
consisting of a written document’;—in *Dāyakrama-saṅgraha* (p. 37);—and
in *Vīra* *mitvodaya* (Vyavahāra 221a), which explains ‘*patram*’ as
*conveyance*.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.118) as describing property that cannot
be partitioned;—it goes on to add that of clothes those only are
impartible which have been worn by some one; the clothes that were worn
by the father should, on bis death, be given away to persons fed at his
*Śrāddha*. The *Bālambhaṭṭī* adds that the view of Medhātithi and
*Kalpataru*—that valuable clothes are not included here—is to be
rejected

It is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 725), which adds that the explanation by
some people of ‘*patram*’ as *conveyance* is opposed to the text of
Kātyāyana, by which the word stands for ‘property entered in a written
document.’

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 504), which adds the following
notes:—‘*Patram*’ is ‘property entered in a written document,’ as is
clear from the texts of Kātyāyana; though *Halāyudha* has explained it
to mean ‘conveyance’;—‘*Kṛtānnam*,’ flour and rice, says the
*Pārijāta*;—‘*Striyāḥ*,’ those that are ‘*Samyukta*,’ ‘attached to,’ any
one in particular;—‘*Yogakṣemam*’ stands for ministers and priests who
are the agents of protection;—‘*Pracārāḥ*,’ paths for the passing of
cattle;—*Halāyudha* has explained ‘*Yoga*’ as ‘boats and such things’
and ‘*Kṣema*’ as ‘forts and such means of safety.’

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava* (Vyavahāra, p. 380), which has the
following notes—‘Clothes’ that are worn;—the clothes worn by the father
should, on his death, be given away to the persons fed at his *Śrāddha*.


