+++
title = "233 तीरितञ् चाऽनुशिष्टम्"

+++
“Medhātithi and Kullūka refer this prohibition to cases which have been
properly decided in the King’s Courts, while Nārāyaṇa thinks that it
applies to orders passed by former kings.—Nandana gives a different
explanation of the words ‘*tīritam*’ and ‘*anuśiṣṭam*’...... according
to which the former means ‘a cause or plaint declared to be just or
unjust by the assessors,’ and the latter ‘a cause or plaint confirmed by
witnesses’.”—(Buhler).

This verse is quoted in *Smṛtitattva*, (II, p. 231), which adds the
following notes:—‘*Anuśiṣṭam*,’ confirmed by witnesses and other
evidence, and hence ‘*tīritam*,’ decided by the assessors;—such suit the
king shall not reopen.

It is quoted in *Mitākṣarā* (2.306), which explains the meaning to be
that the king shall not have a suit reopened simply with a view to exact
a heavier fine; he may however have a decided suit reopened when the
losing party applies for reconsideration and stipulates that he would be
prepared to pay a double fine in the event of the suit being again
decided against him.

It is quoted in *Parāśaramādhava*, (Vyavahāra, p. 161), which adds that
the verse refers to cases where the finding of the Court has been
accepted by the parties concerned;—in *Kṛtyakalpataru* (64b), which has
the following notes—‘*Tīritam*,’ decided and finished,—‘*anuśiṣṭam*,’
deposed to by the witnesses ,—‘*yatra kvacana*,’ in the village-assembly
or other places;—and in *Vīramitrodaya* (Vyavahāra 38b), which says
1,000 *Paṇas* are meant


