+++
title = "287 समैर् हि"

+++
This verse is quoted in *Aparārka* (p. 825), which adds the following
explanations:—That man suffers the ‘first amercement’ who deals with
honest, customers—who pay the right price—dishonestly, giving them
cheaper articles; and the ‘middle amercement’ is the penalty for the man
who, selling the right commodity, receives a higher or lower price.

It is quoted in *Vivādaratnākara* (p. 296), which adds the following
explanation:—The man, who, receiving the same price from a number of
purchasers, sells to them articles of varying, qualities, suffers the
‘first amercement’; and the man who sells commodities of the same
quality to a number of persons, but charges them varying prices, suffers
the ‘middle amercement It goes on to quote Halāyudha as explaining (with
Medhātithi) the verse to mean that the man who deals dishonestly;
‘*viṣamam*’—*i.e*. in exchanging things with a man, he, taking advantage
of the needs of the other party, gives less of his own commodity and
receives more of that of the other man,—when in reality both commodities
are recognised to be of equal value,—or when the vendor, taking
advantage of the needs of the customer, sells to him a cheaper article
at a higher price,—he should suffer either the ‘first’ or the ‘middle’
amercement, according to the value of the commodity concerned. It is
quoted in *Vivādacintāmaṇi* (Calcutta, p. 80), which explains ‘*samaiḥ*’
as ‘ordinary’, and adds the explanation—‘one who replaces a valuable
article by an ordinary one, should fined 250 *Paṇas* if the other party
is put to a loss of the seventh part of his outlay, and 500 *Paṇas* if
the loss is the fifth part or more’.


